=head1 NAME

SQL::Routine::Language - What language or grammar SQL::Routine speaks

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

This file is part of the SQL::Routine library (libSQLRT).

SQL::Routine is Copyright (c) 1999-2004, Darren R. Duncan.  All rights
reserved. Address comments, suggestions, and bug reports to
B<perl@DarrenDuncan.net>, or visit "http://www.DarrenDuncan.net" for more
information.

SQL::Routine is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU General Public License (GPL) version 2 as published by the
Free Software Foundation (http://www.fsf.org/).  You should have received a
copy of the GPL as part of the SQL::Routine distribution, in the file named
"LICENSE"; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple
Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307 USA.

Linking SQL::Routine statically or dynamically with other modules is making a
combined work based on SQL::Routine.  Thus, the terms and conditions of the GPL
cover the whole combination.  As a special exception, the copyright holders of
SQL::Routine give you permission to link SQL::Routine with independent modules,
regardless of the license terms of these independent modules, and to copy and
distribute the resulting combined work under terms of your choice, provided
that every copy of the combined work is accompanied by a complete copy of the
source code of SQL::Routine (the version of SQL::Routine used to produce the
combined work), being distributed under the terms of the GPL plus this
exception.  An independent module is a module which is not derived from or
based on SQL::Routine, and which is fully useable when not linked to
SQL::Routine in any form.

Any versions of SQL::Routine that you modify and distribute must carry
prominent notices stating that you changed the files and the date of any
changes, in addition to preserving this original copyright notice and other
credits. SQL::Routine is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

While it is by no means required, the copyright holders of SQL::Routine would
appreciate being informed any time you create a modified version of
SQL::Routine that you are willing to distribute, because that is a practical
way of suggesting improvements to the standard version.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

SQL::Routine contains SQL schemas and queries, represented as a tree of
atomic tokens; it is structurally like an abstract syntax tree or an XML DOM,
but one that only accepts, respectively, a specific source language or XML
schema.  See the POD built in to SQL::Routine for more details.

The module's API and code make it look like a generic tree, composed of related
Nodes.  The restrictions for which attributes each Node can have, and its
relationship to others, is defined by data (though for efficiency, that data is
also contained in the same module and can't be changed at runtime).

As an analogy, the module has an API like a generic XML DOM, but it can enforce
a specific XML Schema (the data).  The context in which it is used is like a
generic database interface.  The API basically has an "execute" function, to
which a SQL string is given, within that, there is a huge amount of flexibility
of what the SQL string can say, but it must conform to a specific grammar.

This document, SQL::Routine::Language, is meant to say what all the 'types'
of Nodes are, and what attributes and relationships are allowed for each.  It
is meant to say what 'grammar' for SQL::Routine's 'language' is, or what
'schema' it accepts.

The type of information this document would provide is functionally similar to
the SQL design documents, or vendor-specific ones.

=head1 FEATURE SCOPE AND STANDARDS COMPLIANCE

SQL::Routine mainly follows its own path regarding its language structure;
it approximates other SQL variants, including both ANSI/ISO standard SQL and
proprietary versions like PL-SQL and T-SQL, but it matches none of those.  I
believe that such existing versions of SQL are simply too large and complex to
support in their entirety.  Moreover, such as with most software, we have a
situation where 10% of the features are used 90% of the time, or 90% of
users never exercise more than the same 10% of the available features.  Or,
perhaps those numbers should read 99% and 1% instead of 90 and 10.

SQL::Routine aims to be a "90%+ solution", natively supporting what I
consider to be the "most important" features of SQL, those which have stood the
test of time, become widely used, and supported by multiple vendors.  This
includes many "advanced" features which shipping database products often lack,
and even a handful which no database may support now but "should".  I have
mainly avoided features which are new and unused, or unproven, or complicated,
or badly designed, or antiquated, or otherwise look like a product of creeping
featuritis.  This is not to say that I reject new and little used features; if
I see their benefit and they are easy to implement, they get supported now.

SQL::Routine is designed largely in the hindsight of the ANSI/ISO SQL:1999
standard (and with some foresight of the yet-unfinalized SQL:2003) and aims to
conform to it as much as possible.  Where SQL:2003 and other SQL versions talk
about the same features using different words, SQL::Routine will either
match the standard or resemble it the most.  Similarly, as SQL:2003 and
SQL:1999 are fully upward compatible with SQL:1992, so the latter will be
matched.  Unlike most shipping database products, which support mainly
SQL:1992, I will support SQL:2003 (and 1999).  Note that SQL:2003 and SQL:1999
has identical ANSI and ISO standards, while SQL:1992 does not; this is a
practical reason to focus on just 2003 and 1999.

During my work on this project, I found the following resources to be
particularly useful:

=over 4

=item

http://www.wiscorp.com/SQLStandards.html

=item

http://www.wiscorp.com/sql/sql1999_c3.zip (warning, large file)

=item

http://www.wiscorp.com/sql/sql_2003_standard.zip (warning, large file)

=item

http://www.sql-scripts.com/BookExcerpts/SQL99.zip (warning, large file)

=back

Likewise, the vendor documentation for MySQL and SQLite was consulted, plus
third-party and vendor documentation for Oracle, and the odd other SQL site.

This is a brief and incomplete list of major supported features (the rest of
this document goes into more detail on them):

	- native Unicode 4 (UTF-8) support for all identifiers and character data
	- multiple character encoding support in the same database for character data
	- global binary/bit object/data support
	- both exact and inexact numbers, the former being of any length
	- large object support; all character or binary fields can contain 2GB or more
	- multi-column indexes, unique constraints, foreign key constraints
	- large/full text indexing
	- boolean data type
	- datetime/date, interval/time data types
	- multiple schemas in the same catalogue
	- objects in any schema can reference those in other schemas or other catalogues
	- identifiers are internally case-sensitive; case-insensitive ones match as fully uppercase
	- no effective limits; eg: number of tables or columns or rows, size of data per field or row
	- simple domains and user-defined data types (UDTs)
	- enumerated data types
	- arbitrary 'check' constraints (?)
	- routines (stored procedures, user defined functions, triggers)
	- named sub-routines inside routines
	- row, array/rowset data types as variables inside routines, and arguments and return values
	- multiple column unique and foreign key constraints on tables
	- viewed tables / views
	- expressions in any part of a query
	- regular expressions / pattern matching
	- multiple-column predicates in any part of a query
	- cross, inner, and full|left|right outer table joins
	- self joins (same table or view joined to itself N times)
	- compound queries such as union, difference (except), intersection, exclusion
	- 'all' and 'distinct' set quantifiers on both normal and compound queries
	- 'where', 'group by', 'having', 'order by', 'limit'
	- anonymous subqueries in any part of main query
	- named subqueries ("with") likewise
	- both correlated (takes arguments) and uncorrelated (no arguments) subqueries
	- recursive queries
	- all routine and subquery args are declared and used with named syntax (rather than positional)
	- all built-in standard routine args are used with named syntax (rather than positional)
	- select/insert/update/delete rows in tables and viewed tables
	- named (rather than positional) mapping of 'into' clause to 'select list'
	- named (rather than positional) mapping of all input data for both inserts and updates
	- OLAP extensions, rollup, cube, grouping sets (related to group-by)
	- updateable views; inserts, updates, deletes through any view (if key data not lost)
	- "insert as select"
	- multiple users, roles, privileges
	- create/alter/delete schema objects, including user defined functions
	- create/alter/delete catalogs, schemas, users
	- cursors
	- multiple row insert / "write cursors"
	- application host parameters for any data type
	- all host parameters are named (rather than positional)
	- explicit transactions and nested transactions (and savepoints?)
	- record locking for read and locking for write
	- throwing exceptions
	- catching and handling exceptions
	- create, use simple sequence generators, named and on table cols
	- temporary objects, usually tables
	- triggers firing on DML events of either tables or views
	- "base tables" and "temporary base tables"

This is a brief list of major non-supported features (at present), or current limitations:

	- multiple distinct values per row field (this violates level-1 normalization)
	- complex domains and compound user-defined data types
	- 'set' data types
	- collection types, such as arrays, stored in tables
	- reference data types, stored in tables
	- table hierarchies or subtables; anything not a "base table" or "viewed table"
	- object data types
	- user defined "operators" (as being distinct from user defined functions)
	- geographical data types and related extensions
	- referencing objects in an "information schema" by users like normal schema objects (?)
	- dynamic SQL; eg: generating and executing new SQL in a stored procedure
	- creating user defined functions that aren't SQL (though they can be called)
	- sequence generators will only produce integers, and not fractions or strings
	- explic ref most "optimization" features; eg: hints, cache sett, res pre-alloc or limits, "tablespaces"
	- explicit references to logs or replication managed by the database product itself
	- named Oracle "synonyms" (?)
	- triggers firing on non-DML events

Generally speaking, SQL::Routine holds to a purely relational database
model, where every intersection of a column and a row in a table or view is an
atomic value.  Anything which breaks from this mold is currently not supported.  
This said, transient data such as variables in routines (stored procedures) can 
and often are more complex types like arrays or records or references; likewise 
input and output values of routines, and host parameters, can be complex types.

=head1 CIRCUMVENTING FEATURE LIMITATIONS

For such situations where you want to use SQL::Routine to mediate your
access to a database, and it doesn't natively support a database product
feature that you want to use, SQL::Routine does provide a "back door" where
you have un-mediated access to the database.  Speaking more accurately, 
SQL::Routine can store fragments of any raw SQL that you specify, to be 
injected into the SQL that is generated from its objects.  

The trade-off is that these portions probably won't work with more than one
database product, and so you would be best to just use them for "optimization"
type SQL that will help your app on a supported product, but the app will still
work (perhaps slower) without them.  If you can't do that, then
SQL::Routine lets you store alternative SQL fragments that are keyed to a
database product; if you store fragments with the same function in multiple
versions, then the one for the product you are interfacing now will be used and
the others ignored.

SQL fragments can either be pieces of a larger to-be-generated statement which
you attach them to, or they can be complete SQL statements on their own, where
you specify that they run between certain generated statements, or inside a
generated routine.

For the present, you can also store "SQL comments" in this fashion.

All this said and done, the use of the circumvention features are not
recommended, and should only be attempted by savvy / power users or DBAs. 
Ultimately, adding native support for a feature is better.

=head1 LANGUAGE CONCEPT STRUCTURE

SQL::Routine manages SQL concepts that we arrange into 4 main categories for
convenience: 'blueprints', 'tools', 'sites', 'circumventions'.

The first of these, 'blueprints', is the most important; it describes
completely the composition and behaviour of your database schemas and
application-level routines that talk to them.  For all intents and purposes, it
is part of your core application code and would get distributed as such; like
your core application code, everyone's installation will be identical.  We
describe most model structures in 'blueprints', including database tables (with
constraints), arbitrarily complex database views, and various kinds of routines
(such as stored procedures, user defined functions, and basic DML like selects,
inserts, updates, deletes), both those stored in a database schema or in an
application.  We can represent multiple database catalogs and applications at
once, whether or not they talk to each other; how they inter-relate is also
represented.

The second two categories, 'tools' and 'sites', are effectively locale or
site-specific configuration data, and each installation of your application
would be different in these areas.  We use 'tools' to store a small list of one
or more externally (to SQL::Routine and your application core) recognizable
database product identifiers (such as SQLite or Oracle) that are used on a site
to implement the database catalogs.  We use 'sites' to indicate localized
details of your database (and application) installations, such as the product
used for each catalog instance, or its DSN or server address or file path, or
what users it has and their privileges.  If you have multiple copies of a
database installed, such as for test data vs production data, you can
distinguish between them in 'sites'.

The last category, 'circumventions', is used to implement SQL::Routine's
"circumvention" features, to access concepts that a specific database product
understands but nothing in the SQL::Routine code does.

While a database and application are actually being *used* (post-installation
at a site), structures belonging to each of the 4 categories would be stored
persistantly in two main places.  One of these is the native schema of a
database itself.  The second of these is structures that are not stored in a
database, but in an application that uses the database.  Many structures, such
as views and routines, can be stored in either place; some, like tables, can
probably only be stored in the database; either way, the places can overlap
greatly.  In practice, you would pick what to put in each place on a per-case
basis, accounting for how powerful your database is, what arrangement is more
secure, or is faster, or is easier to manage, and so on.

Here is a tree diagram, formatted visually like XML, which shows the high
level SQL::Routine language concepts; each distinct concept is represented
by one tree node.  Parent nodes provide a context in which their children live
(eg: a table only exists within a schema).  The top 2 tree levels don't
represent anything themselves, but just group the actual concepts that exist in
the 3rd level and below.  The node attribute 'c' shows the cardinality of that
node type beneath its parent; a value of 'M' means 'many' and '1' means 'one'. 
The node attribute 'r' indicates recursion, where a node can be a child of
another of the same type (eg: a sub-query or sub-routine).

	<root c="1">
		<blueprints c="1">
			<catalog c="M">
				<owner c="M" />
				<catalog_link c="M" />
				<schema c="M">
					<domain c="M" />
					<sequence c="M" />
					<table c="M" />
					<view c="M" r="Y" />
					<routine c="M" r="Y" />
				</schema>
				<role c="M">
					<privilege_on c="M">
						<privilege_for c="M" />
					</privilege_on>
				</role>
			</catalog>
			<application c="M">
				<catalog_link c="M" />
				<domain c="M" />
				<sequence c="M" />
				<table c="M" />
				<view c="M" r="Y" />
				<routine c="M" r="Y" />
			</application>
		</blueprints>
		<tools c="1">
			<data_storage_product c="M" />
			<data_link_product c="M" />
		</tools>
		<sites c="1">
			<catalog_instance c="M">
				<catalog_instance_opt c="M" />
				<catalog_link_instance c="M" r="Y" />
				<user c="M">
					<user_role c="M" />
				</user>
			</catalog_instance>
			<application_instance c="M">
				<catalog_link_instance c="M" r="Y">
					<catalog_link_instance_opt c="M" />
				</catalog_link_instance>
			</application_instance>
		</sites>
		<circumventions c="1">
			<sql_fragment c="M" />
		</circumventions>
	</root>

	<domain c="M">
		<domain_opt c="M" />
	</domain>

	<table c="M">
		<table_col c="M" />
		<table_ind c="M">
			<table_ind_col c="M" />
		</table_ind>
	</table>

	<view c="M" r="Y">
		<view_arg c="M" />
		<view_src c="M">
			<view_src_arg c="M" />
			<view_src_col c="M" />
		</view_src>
		<view_col c="M" />
		<view_join c="M">
			<view_join_col c="M" />
		</view_join>
		<view_hierarchy c="1" />
		<view_expr c="M" r="Y" />
	</view>

	<routine c="M" r="Y">
		<routine_context c="1" />
		<routine_arg c="M" />
		<view c="M" r="Y" />
		<routine_var c="M" />
		<routine_stmt c="M">
			<routine_expr c="M" r="Y" />
		</routine_stmt>
	</routine>

For the most part, each 'concept' shown in the tree above corresponds to a
single SQL::Routine Node Type.  Each Node Type is explained in further
detail below.

Besides the Node it is a child of, a Node can reference other Nodes almost
anywhere else in the tree, with the following exceptions: 1. Considering the
order of the 4 main categories above, Nodes in any category can not reference
Nodes in a later category; they can only reference self or earlier; 2. Nodes in
'tools' can't reference anything else; 3. Catalog Nodes can't reference
Application Nodes.

=head1 LANGUAGE PROCEDURAL STRUCTURE

The SQL::Routine language is designed with an embedded SQL paradigm in
mind, where all SQL can be invoked as if it was written in the same language as
the program code which invokes it.  The SQL can take arguments like a normal
program routine, and it can hand return values like a normal program routine; 
either of those can be considered named host parameters.

The SQL::Routine language is designed so that you would do B<all> types of
database interaction with it; not only would you use SQL to issue typical DML
or DDL commands, but you would attach (connect to) or create a database in the
first place using SQL.  This is much like CLI database clients and their
"connect to ... identified by ..." or "attach ... as ..." SQL statements, or
similar statements that run inside a database stored procedure that connect to
a second database.  In fact, the SQL::Routine language is designed such
that you should be able to run the same SQL commands either in a client
application or in a database stored procedure, without changes.  Likewise, your
application should be able to invoke a SQL routine the same way whether it is
stored in the application or the database.  By contrast, some other modules for
letting your application talk to a database require you to call non-sql
routines for some operations like connecting to a database.

The SQL::Routine language takes a broad definition as to what constitutes a
SQL routine.  While some RDBMS products don't support this in stored
procedures, my understanding is that the SQL standard defines a SQL routine as
an ordered (and usually named) sequence of any type of SQL statements that are
to be run together.  Usually, SQL routines stored in a database only contain
DML, but some RDBMS products also let you manipulate users or schema objects
within stored procedures.  Regardless of those limitations, my understanding is
that any SQL which an RDBMS product understands at all can be issued from an
application based routine.

In practice, the way of providing arguments to named database stored routines
can be different from a way passing arguments to un-named routines or queries
constructed on a client application; the latter often uses 'host parameters' for
sending or receiving data, while the former uses named routine arguments and/or
has an explicit return value.  The SQL::Routine language unifies these
concepts and makes it as if all SQL statements take named arguments, and
"return" a value; in database stored procedures, this is the same as usual; on
the client side, the named arguments each correspond to a named host parameter.

Similarly, all SQL "select" queries are treated as cursors; on the database
side this is the same as usual; on the application/client side, this may or may
not be the same as usual.  When an application invokes a "select", they will
get a cursor handle returned to them (either a real cursor or a fake cursor),
off of which they fetch the rows or values that the "select" retrieves.

It is expected that modules which interface a database on an application's
behalf, and that take SQL::Routine language constructs as input, will be
structured with a B<Command Design Pattern>.  They should essentially provide a
"SQL Engine" object that has a single "Execute" function.  The latter would
take a SQL::Routine "routine" Node (or an object wrapping one
that also holds values for the routine's arguments) as input.  The function
would return a "Result" object that encapsulates any return values from the
SQL, such as a select cursor handle or other types of returned data or details
of an error that occurred.  The object returned as output from "Execute" should
also have its own "Execute" method when the object can be considered a context
for future commands; eg: the object returned from an "open database" command
should represent that database for further queries against it.

The SQL::Routine language does not require you to explicitly run a
connect/open/attach command before running SQL against a database.  Since the
info it needs to do this is provided in 'catalog link' definitions that are
already related to the SQL definitions, an implementer can just implicitely
connect to a database for you when you ask it to run the SQL.  And that
implicit link can either be cached or new, such as the implementer decides. 
I<Note that this idea may need to be thought out further.>

=head1 NODE ATTRIBUTE TYPES

There are 4 major SQL::Routine Node attribute types, and a Node object
provides separate accessor methods for those attributes of each type (a
consistency held between the Perl and C versions).  Each major type may be
further sub-divided into minor types, which are tested for by the above
methods.  Each instance of a Node attribute corresponds to one XML tag
attribute, if a Node object were an XML tag.  The types are:

=over 4

=item

B<node_id> - There is exactly one of these per Node; it is a positive (<gt>=1)
integer which uniquely identifies this particular Node among all others of the
same Node Type.  There are no minor types under this major type.

=item

B<literal> - This is the normal kind of Node attribute, and it can contain any
scalar value, such as a string or a number.  Some attributes of this type may
actually be restricted, such as to only valid integer or date or boolean
values; that restriction is what differentiates the literal minor types.

=item

B<enumerated> - This is like B<literal> except that the values you can store
are restricted to an explicit enumerated set of values.  Each minor type is a
specific enumerated value set.  (A subsequent documentation section lists the
currently known enumerated sets.)

=item

B<node_ref> - This is a number which is equal to the B<node_id> of another Node
that has a particular Node Type; it is used to implement relations between
Nodes.  This attribute type is for attributes whose conceptual values are
either multi-part or are possibly shared by multiple Nodes.  Each minor type is 
a Node Type.

=back

=head1 LITERAL ATTRIBUTE TYPES

Currently, SQL::Routine recognizes these explicit literal attribute types:

=over 4

=item

B<bool> - This is a boolean type, and its values may only be '0' or '1'.
Attributes of this type are "flags", saying 'true' when set or 'false' when not.

=item

B<uint> - This is an "unsigned integer", also known as a non-negative integer;
its values may only be integers greater than or equal to 0.  Attributes of this
type indicate the "scale" of something, meaning how 'big' or 'long' it is.

=item

B<sint> - This is an "signed integer", and its values may be any integer. 
Attributes of this type are normally used in concert with sequence generators.

=item

B<cstr> - This is a "character string" where each character can be anything
except the null character.  Attributes of this type are usually "labels" and
"name" something.

=item

B<misc> - This is a "miscellaneous scalar"; its values may be anything a Perl
scalar can be.  Attributes of this type usually hold literal data that only has
meaning to a user and is not interpreted by a machine; alternately, they are
used to store any literal whose type varies or isn't a bool or uint or cstr.

=back

=head1 ENUMERATED ATTRIBUTE TYPES

These are the enumerated attribute types that SQL::Routine knows about.

=head2 container_type

These are high level structures that can represent contexts in which standard
built-in routines execute, and they can represent general variable types that
routine arguments, variables, or return types, or intermediate values of
expressions can be.  Note that all table and view column values have an
implicit container_type of SCALAR.

	ERROR  - an error message object (a message key, named list of values)
	SCALAR - a typed scalar variable, such as a boolean or number or cstring or bstring
	ROW    - a row variable; a named list of SCALAR (SQL:2003 type is 'ROW'); each elem is a "field"
	SC_ARY - an ordered list of SCALAR (SQL:2003 type is 'ARRAY')
	RW_ARY - an ordered list of ROW (SQL:2003 type is 'ARRAY')
	CONN   - a database connection context (may be closed or open)
	CURSOR - a database cursor context (may be closed or open)
	LIST   - for exprs that are a generic list or explicit grouping of sub-exprs (comma-delim, paren-bound)

	SRT_NODE      - for client code only; stores a SQL::Routine::Node object
	SRT_NODE_LIST - for client code only; stores a list of SQL::Routine::Node objects

	If either of SRT_NODE[|_LIST] appear with a ":foo" appended, such as
	"SRT_NODE:foo", that means only a "foo" Node (or list thereof) is taken,
	rather than any kind of Node; if multiple specific Node types are accepted,
	then "foo" is a comma-delimited list of them.

	The following won't be implemented in the short term:

	ENVI   - a db/app/dlp environment context; usually just one (conceptually), which is global
	TRAN   - a database transaction context

Note that matters such as variable-vs-constant and bind vars or
in-vs-out-vs-inout or literal vs var/col/arg are not distinguished by this
enumerated type.

=head2 exception_type

These represent the basic types of exception objects which both standard
built-in routines and user-defined routines can throw if they fail; they can
also be caught by user-defined routines.  If stored in a routine variable, they
have a container_type of ERROR.  

I<Note: The SQL:2003 Standard says to use the keyword 'CONDITION' rather than 'EXCEPTION' 
to refer to this sort of thing; it has deprecated the use of the latter keyword as 
an alias for the former; see SQL:2003 Foundation p1171.>

	SRTX_NO_ENVI_LOAD_FAILED
		- If data link product failed to load, from non-existence or missing dependencies.
	SRTX_ENVI_EXEC_FAILED
		- If data link product loaded successfully, but later had non-conn related failure.
	SRTX_NO_CONN_SERVER_ABSENT
		- If server doesn't exist, is inactive, is ignoring connection requests.
	SRTX_NO_CONN_BAD_AUTH
		- If server explicitly rejects connection attempt due to bad login credentials.
	SRTX_NO_CONN_ACTIVE_LOST
		- If an active server connection halts prematurely, from server or network failure.

=head2 standard_routine, standard_routine_context, standard_routine_arg

These represent the basic types of actions that a database engine or database
client can perform, and are the "built-in" functions of the SQL::Routine
virtual database language.  The action types include: connection and
transaction management, queries and cursors, DML and DDL, user and privilege
management, and error handling.  You always invoke these within user-defined
routines, sometimes directly as routine statements, and sometimes indirectly
when they form parts of user-defined view or query definitions.

Each standard routine may take arguments and/or return a value.  All arguments
are named, as with user-defined routines; likewise, there is exactly one
un-named return value, if any.  Where [routine_stmt, routine_expr, view_expr]
SRT Nodes can have a 'standard_routine' attribute set, only child
[routine_expr, view_expr] Nodes can have a 'standard_routine_arg' attribute
set.  Each standard routine will throw an exception (container_type is ERROR)
if it fails, instead of returning a value; any standard routine may throw more
than one type of exception depending on the circumstance.

Beneath each routine name is up to 6 kinds of information, having the following
labels; for brevity, a label won't be shown if its value would be 'none':

	purpose: what the routine does that validates its existence
	context: what context type the routine must be called within; it is a special argument
	args: what non-context arguments the routine takes, if any
	effects: what side-effects there are of executing it, besides its return value
	returns: what type of value/container the routine returns
	throws: what types of exceptions are thrown if routine fails

Most arguments take one value each, and are indicated with the "(1)"; some
arguments take a list of one or more similarly used elements, indicated by a
"(N)".  For view_expr or routine_expr Nodes that have call_sroutine_arg valued,
the expr_type will always be LIST with "(N)" arguments (the child exprs are the
elements); with "(1)" arguments, the expr Nodes are ordinary; this allows a set
of expr Nodes to guarantee distinct call_sroutine_arg values under a
call_sroutine.

This set of connection management built-ins may only be invoked in a
client-side routine, usually with 'routine_stmt' Nodes.

	CATALOG_LIST()
		purpose: 
			- Fetches a list of auto-detectable database instances.
			- Skips by default any details that CATALOG_INFO() and CONN-context
			built-ins can handle; it is minimalist for speed.
		args:
			- RECURSIVE - SCALAR.bool - Opt: To scan inside each db as well.
		effects: 
			- A new 'catalog' Node is added to the SQL::Routine::Container for
			each one found, plus associated 'catalog_link', 'catalog_instance',
			and 'catalog_link_instance' Nodes (one each per 'catalog'), plus
			'data_storage_product' and 'data_link_product' Nodes if necessary.
			- If RECURSIVE is true, call CATALOG_INFO() in recursive mode for
			each database catalog found.
		returns: 
			- SRT_NODE_LIST:catalog_link - The newly added cli Nodes.
		throws:
			- SRTX_NO_ENVI_LOAD_FAILED, SRTX_ENVI_EXEC_FAILED,
			SRTX_NO_CONN_SERVER_ABSENT, SRTX_NO_CONN_BAD_AUTH,
			SRTX_NO_CONN_ACTIVE_LOST

	CATALOG_INFO()
		purpose:
			- Fetches some detailed info about a database instance.
			- Skips by default any details that other CONN-context built-ins
			can handle; it is minimalist for speed.
			- Note: There may not be any info to gather in minimalist mode.
		args:
			- LINK_BP - SRT_NODE:catalog_link - The catalog to scan.
			- RECURSIVE - SCALAR.bool - Opt: To get all determinable details.
		effects:
			- May set some catalog Node attributes, or add child Nodes.
			- If RECURSIVE is true, call these built-ins in recursive mode: 
			OWNER_LIST(), SCHEMA_LIST(), ROLE_LIST(), USER_LIST().
		returns:
			- SRT_NODE:catalog_link - The same cli that LINK_BP has.
		throws:
			- SRTX_NO_ENVI_LOAD_FAILED, SRTX_ENVI_EXEC_FAILED,
			SRTX_NO_CONN_SERVER_ABSENT, SRTX_NO_CONN_BAD_AUTH,
			SRTX_NO_CONN_ACTIVE_LOST

	CATALOG_VERIFY() 
		purpose:
			- Compares a provided db spec to an actual database.
			- Functions analagously to CATALOG_INFO() except that no changes
			are made to the SQL::Routine::Container; existing Nodes therein are
			compared to instead.
		args:
			- LINK_BP - SRT_NODE:catalog_link - The catalog to scan.
			- RECURSIVE - SCALAR.bool - Opt: To verify all possible details.
		returns:
			- SCALAR.bool - A true value if the db matches the spec, false if not.
			- If the details that the database product stores or reports about
			itself are more ambiguous or less detailed than the SRT model that
			it is being compared to, but the former is still valid as a
			degraded case of the latter, then CATALOG_VERIFY() will still
			return true.  This would happen, for example, if the model defines
			a foreign key constraint, and the database engine has no support
			for those.  So just the details a db does support are tested.
		throws:
			- SRTX_NO_ENVI_LOAD_FAILED, SRTX_ENVI_EXEC_FAILED,
			SRTX_NO_CONN_SERVER_ABSENT, SRTX_NO_CONN_BAD_AUTH,
			SRTX_NO_CONN_ACTIVE_LOST

	CATALOG_CREATE() 
		purpose:
			- Creates a new database instance.
			- By default, creates just the catalog but puts nothing inside it.
		args:
			- LINK_BP - SRT_NODE:catalog_link - The catalog to create.
			- RECURSIVE - SCALAR.bool - Opt: To create all possible details.
		effects:
			- If RECURSIVE is true, creates all database schemas and users also.
		throws:
			- SRTX_NO_ENVI_LOAD_FAILED, SRTX_ENVI_EXEC_FAILED,
			SRTX_NO_CONN_SERVER_ABSENT, SRTX_NO_CONN_BAD_AUTH,
			SRTX_NO_CONN_ACTIVE_LOST

	CATALOG_DELETE() 
		purpose:
			- Deletes a database instance.
		args:
			- LINK_BP - SRT_NODE:catalog_link - The catalog to delete.

	CATALOG_CLONE() 
		purpose:
			- Makes a clone of a db instance in another storage loc.
		args:
			- SOURCE_LINK_BP - SRT_NODE:catalog_link - The catalog to copy from.
			- DEST_LINK_BP - SRT_NODE:catalog_link - The catalog to copy to / create.

	CATALOG_MOVE() 
		purpose:
			- Moves a db inst from one storage location to another.
		args:
			- SOURCE_LINK_BP - SRT_NODE:catalog_link - The catalog location to move from.
			- DEST_LINK_BP - SRT_NODE:catalog_link - The catalog location to move to.

This set of connection management built-ins may only be invoked in a
routine, client or database side, usually with 'routine_stmt' Nodes.

	CATALOG_OPEN() 
		purpose:
			- Opens a link or connection to a database instance from an application.
			- Note that it is the routine_var or routine_arg declaration SRT
			Node that references the catalog_link which defines our basic
			connection details; this var/arg is provided in CONN_CX.
		context:
			- CONN_CX - CONN - A routine var or arg that will hold the new connection handle.
		args:
			- LOGIN_NAME - SCALAR.cstr - Opt: A runtime-provided username to connect with.
			- LOGIN_PASS - SCALAR.cstr - Opt: A runtime-provided password to connect with.
		effects:
			- The CONN_CX changes from an inactive state to active, ready to pipe data.
		throws:
			- SRTX_NO_ENVI_LOAD_FAILED, SRTX_ENVI_EXEC_FAILED,
			SRTX_NO_CONN_SERVER_ABSENT, SRTX_NO_CONN_BAD_AUTH,
			SRTX_NO_CONN_ACTIVE_LOST

		TODO: Provide a way to clone a connection and/or allow multiple
		"lightweight connections" or independent transactional contexts to
		share the same actual/heavy connection.

	CATALOG_CLOSE() 
		purpose:
			- Closes a link or connection to a database instance from an application.
		context:
			- CONN_CX - CONN - The open database connection context to be closed.
		effects:
			- The CONN_CX changes from an active to an inactive state.
		throws:
			- SRTX_NO_CONN_ACTIVE_LOST

	CATALOG_PING() 
		purpose:
			- Verifies that a db connection is still open, that the db is accessible.
		context:
			- CONN_CX - CONN - The open database connection context to be pinged.
		returns:
			- SCALAR.bool - A true value if the db connection is still active,
			false if not.
			- Since we are explicitly testing it, no SRTX_NO_CONN_ACTIVE_LOST
			exception is thrown if the connection is down.

	CATALOG_ATTACH() 
		purpose:
			- Attaches a link or connection to a database instance from another db instance.
		context:
			- CONN_CX - CONN - An open database connection to provide our action context.
		args:
			- LINK_BP - SRT_NODE:catalog_link - The catalog to connect to.
		throws:
			- SRTX_NO_CONN_ACTIVE_LOST

	CATALOG_DETACH() 
		purpose:
			- Detaches a link or connection to a database instance from another db instance.
		context:
			- CONN_CX - CONN - An open database connection to provide our action context.
		args:
			- LINK_BP - SRT_NODE:catalog_link - The catalog to connect to.
		throws:
			- SRTX_NO_CONN_ACTIVE_LOST

This set of schema management or data definition built-ins may only be invoked in a
routine, client or database side, usually with 'routine_stmt' Nodes.

	SCHEMA_LIST()         - fetches a list of schemas of open db instance
	SCHEMA_INFO(schema)   - fetches some detailed info about a schemas
	SCHEMA_VERIFY(schema) - compares a provided schema spec to an actual schemas
	SCHEMA_CREATE(schema) - creates a new schema in catalog of open db inst
	SCHEMA_DELETE(schema) - deletes an existing schema in open db inst (if it can)
	SCHEMA_CLONE(schema,schema) - creates a clone of an existing schema with different name
	SCHEMA_UPDATE(schema) - alters details for an existing schema
	DOMAIN_LIST(schema)   - fetches a list of domains of open db instance
	DOMAIN_INFO(domain)   - fetches some detailed info about a domain
	DOMAIN_VERIFY(domain) - compares a provided domain spec to an actual domain
	DOMAIN_CREATE(domain) - creates a new domain in schema of open db inst
	DOMAIN_DELETE(domain) - deletes an existing domain in open db inst (if it can)
	DOMAIN_CLONE(domain,domain) - creates a clone of an existing domain with different name
	DOMAIN_UPDATE(domain) - alters details for an existing domain
	SEQU_LIST(schema)     - fetches a list of sequence generators in schema of open db instance
	SEQU_INFO(sequence)   - fetches some detailed info about a sequence
	SEQU_VERIFY(sequence) - compares a provided sequence generator spec to an actual table
	SEQU_CREATE(sequence) - creates a new sequence generator in schema of open db inst
	SEQU_DELETE(sequence) - deletes an existing sequence generator in open db inst (if it can)
	SEQU_CLONE(sequence,sequence) - creates a clone of an existing sequence with different name
	SEQU_UPDATE(sequence) - alters details for an existing sequence generator
	TABLE_LIST(schema)  - fetches a list of tables in schema of open db instance
	TABLE_INFO(table)   - fetches some detailed info about a table
	TABLE_VERIFY(table) - compares a provided table spec to an actual table
	TABLE_CREATE(table) - creates a new table in schema of open db inst
	TABLE_DELETE(table) - deletes an existing table in open db inst (if it can)
	TABLE_CLONE(table,table) - creates a clone of an existing table with different name
	TABLE_UPDATE(table) - alters details for an existing table
	VIEW_LIST(schema) - fetches a list of views in schema of open db instance
	VIEW_INFO(view)   - fetches some detailed info about a view
	VIEW_VERIFY(view) - compares a provided view spec to an actual view
	VIEW_CREATE(view) - creates a new view in schema of open db inst
	VIEW_DELETE(view) - deletes an existing view in open db inst (if it can)
	VIEW_CLONE(view,view) - creates a clone of an existing view with different name
	VIEW_UPDATE(view) - alters details for an existing view
	ROUTINE_LIST(schema)    - fetches a list of routines/procs/funcs of open db instance
	ROUTINE_INFO(routine)   - fetches some detailed info about a routine
	ROUTINE_VERIFY(routine) - compares a provided routine spec to an actual routine
	ROUTINE_CREATE(routine) - creates a new routine in schema of open db inst
	ROUTINE_DELETE(routine) - deletes an existing routine in open db inst (if it can)
	ROUTINE_CLONE(routine,routine) - creates a clone of an existing routine with different name
	ROUTINE_UPDATE(routine) - alters details for an existing routine

This set of user management built-ins may only be invoked in a
routine, client or database side, usually with 'routine_stmt' Nodes.

	USER_LIST()        - fetches a list of users in open db instance
	USER_INFO(user)    - fetches some detailed info about a database user
	USER_VERIFY(user)  - compares a provided user spec to an actual user
	USER_CREATE(user)  - creates new db user one can auth CATALOG_OPEN with (if privs)
	USER_DELETE(user)  - deletes db user (as well as all schema it owns, if applic)
	USER_CLONE(user,user) - creates a clone of an existing user with different name
	USER_UPDATE(user)  - alters some details for a database user
	USER_GRANT(user)   - grants a db privilege to a db user
	USER_REVOKE(user)  - revokes a db privilege from a db user

This set of data management or logic or program flow control or miscellaneous
built-ins may only be invoked in a routine, client or database side, usually
with 'routine_stmt' Nodes.

	REC_FETCH(view)   - fetches records from a table or view of multiple tables
	REC_VERIFY(view)  - compares a provided set of records to stored ones
	REC_INSERT(view)  - inserts new recs into a table or view of multiple tables
	REC_UPDATE(view)  - updates exist recs in a table or view of multiple tables
	REC_DELETE(view)  - deletes exist recs from a table or view of multiple tables
	REC_REPLACE(view) - either updates or inserts recs if they exist or not
	REC_CLONE(view)   - creates a clone of a record in same table/view (if possible)
	REC_LOCK(view)    - places a lock on recs for a consistant read plus update
	REC_UNLOCK(view)  - releases an existing lock on recs

	RETURN() 
		purpose:
			- Causes the parent routine to stop right away, and optionally returns a value.
		args:
			- RETURN_VALUE - Opt: The container expression value that the parent routine returns.

	CURSOR_OPEN() 
		purpose:
			- Opens a select cursor context for reading from (or performs a select if in right context).
		context:
			- CURSOR_CX - CURSOR - A routine var or arg that holds a cursor definition.
		effects:
			- The CURSOR_CX changes from an inactive state to active, ready to be fetched from.

	CURSOR_CLOSE() 
		purpose:
			- Closes a select cursor context when you're done with it.
		context:
			- CURSOR_CX - CURSOR - The open cursor context to be closed.
		effects:
			- The CURSOR_CX changes from an active to an inactive state.

	CURSOR_FETCH() 
		purpose:
			- Reads a row from an opened cursor and puts it in a row/list variable.
		context:
			- CURSOR_CX - CURSOR - An open cursor to provide our action context.

	SELECT_INTO() 
		purpose:
			- Fetches one row from a table/view and puts it in a row/list variable.
		context:
			- CONN_CX - CONN - An open database connection to provide our action context.
		args:
			- SELECT_DEFN - SRT_NODE:view - The view that defines this select action.

	INSERT() 
		purpose:
			- Inserts a row into a table/view.
		context:
			- CONN_CX - CONN - An open database connection to provide our action context.
		args:
			- INSERT_DEFN - SRT_NODE:view - The view that defines this insert action.

	UPDATE() 
		purpose:
			- Updates a row in a table/view.
		context:
			- CONN_CX - CONN - An open database connection to provide our action context.
		args:
			- UPDATE_DEFN - SRT_NODE:view - The view that defines this update action.

	DELETE() 
		purpose:
			- Deletes a row in a table/view.
		context:
			- CONN_CX - CONN - An open database connection to provide our action context.
		args:
			- DELETE_DEFN - SRT_NODE:view - The view that defines this delete action.

	COMMIT() 
		purpose:
			- Commits the current transaction, then starts a new one.
		context:
			- CONN_CX - CONN - An open database connection to provide our action context.

	ROLLBACK() 
		purpose:
			- Rolls back the current transaction, then starts a new one.
		context:
			- CONN_CX - CONN - An open database connection to provide our action context.

	According to SQL-1999, a transaction affects all types of SQL statements;
	if one is rolled back then it has no affect on SQL-schemas or SQL-data.  Or
	maybe it isn't quite that simple; see section 4.8.5 of SQL-1999.

The following possible built-ins currently lack rigorous definitions.

	LOCK - 
	UNLOCK - 
	PLAIN - 
	THROW - 
	TRY - 
	CATCH - 
	IF - 
	ELSEIF - 
	ELSE - 
	SWITCH - 
	CASE - 
	OTHERWISE - 
	FOREACH - 
	FOR - 
	WHILE - 
	UNTIL - 
	MAP - 
	GREP - 
	REGEXP - 
	LOOP - a loop/iterator context inside a routine, such as a 'foreach'
	CONDITION - a conditional context inside a routine, such as an 'if'
	LOGIC - some control-flow logic operation ...

This set of built-in standard routines may be invoked within any routine or
view, client or db side, usually with 'routine_expr' or 'view_expr' Nodes.

	CAST() 
		purpose:
			- Cast a single child expression into a different data-type specified by a domain node.
		args:
			- CAST_TARGET - SRT_NODE:domain - The data type to cast the operand as.
			- CAST_OPERAND - SCALAR - The data value we are casting into a data type.
		returns:
			- SCALAR - The new value having the target data type.

	NOT     - a logical 'not', true iif lone arg is false
		FACTOR(1) - the value being not-ed
	AND     - a logical 'and', true iif every arg is true
		FACTORS(N) - the list of values being and-ed
	OR      - a logical 'or', true iif at least one arg is true
		FACTORS(N) - the list of values being or-ed
	XOR     - a logical 'xor', true iif 1+ arg true and 1+ arg false
		FACTORS(N) - the list of values being xor-ed
	EQ      - true if both args are equal (both args cast same tp)
		LHS(1) - the left-hand operand
		RHS(1) - the right-hand operand
	NE      - true if both args are unequal (when same data type)
		LHS(1) - the left-hand operand
		RHS(1) - the right-hand operand
	LT      - true if first arg is less than second
		LHS(1) - the left-hand operand
		RHS(1) - the right-hand operand
	GT      - true if first arg is greater than second
		LHS(1) - the left-hand operand
		RHS(1) - the right-hand operand
	LE      - true if first arg is less than or equal to second
		LHS(1) - the left-hand operand
		RHS(1) - the right-hand operand
	GE      - true if first arg is greater than or equal to second
		LHS(1) - the left-hand operand
		RHS(1) - the right-hand operand
	IS_NULL - true if only arg is a null value
		ARG(1) - the value being evaluated
	NOT_NULL - true if only arg is not a null value
		ARG(1) - the value being evaluated
	COALESCE - returns first arg which is not null (like Oracle 'NVL')
		TERMS(N) - the list of values being coalesced
	SWITCH  - a logical switch-case expr (like Oracle 'DECODE')
		LOOK_IN(1) - the value to evaluate for the switch expression
		CASES(N) - the list of pairs (two-val-LISTs) of test expressions plus return values
		DEFAULT(1) - the default return value
	LIKE    - true if first arg contains second; args 3,4 are flags
		LOOK_IN(1) - the string to look in
		LOOK_FOR(1) - the string to look for
		FIXED_LEFT(1) - the look-for string must match the leftmost look-in chars
		FIXED_RIGHT(1) - the look-for string must match the rightmost look-in chars
	ADD     - sum result of adding all args as numbers
		TERMS(N) - the list of values being added
	SUB     - difference result of subtracting second arg from first
		START(1) - the value being subtracted from
		REMOVE(1) - the list of values being subtracted
	MUL     - product result of multiplying all arguments
		FACTORS(N) - the list of values being multiplied
	DIV     - quotient result of dividing first argument by second
		DIVIDEND(1) - value being divided up
		DIVISOR(1) - value being divided by
	DIVI    - integral division of first arg by second
		DIVIDEND(1) - value being divided up
		DIVISOR(1) - value being divided by
	MOD     - modulus of integral division of first arg by second
		DIVIDEND(1) - value being divided up
		DIVISOR(1) - value being divided by
	ROUND   - rounds first arg to N dec places; N is second arg or 0
		START(1) - value being rounded
		PLACES(1) - how many decimal places to round to (default is 0, to get a whole number)
	ABS     - absolute value of the operand (distance from zero)
		OPERAND(1) - value we start with
	POWER   - raises first arg to the power of the second
		RADIX(1) - the radix/base
		EXPONENT(1) - the exponent
	LOG     - logarithm of the first arg on the base of second
		START(1) - the starting value
		RADIX(1) - the radix/base
	SCONCAT - L.cstr concat of all arguments
		FACTORS(N) - the strings being concatenated
	SLENGTH - length of input string in characters
		SOURCE(1) - the string to find the length of
	SINDEX  - pos in arg 1 of arg 2 if present, start at arg 3
		LOOK_IN(1) - the string to look in
		LOOK_FOR(1) - the string to look for
		START_POS(1) - how many chars from the start of the string to start (default is first)
	SUBSTR  - substr in arg 1 starting pos arg 2 of length arg 3
		LOOK_IN(1) - the string to extract from
		START_POS(1) - how many chars from the start of the string to start (default is first)
		STR_LEN(1) - how many chars to extract (default is all from offset)
	SREPEAT - L.cstr concat arg 1 to self repeated by arg 2 instances
		FACTOR(1) - the starting value
		REPEAT(1) - how many times to repeat
	STRIM   - trims leading and trailing whitespace from arg 1
		SOURCE(1) - the starting value
	SPAD    - lengthens arg 1 to length of arg 2 using arg 3 or space
		SOURCE(1) - the starting value
	SPADL   - like spad but add filler on left rather than right
		SOURCE(1) - the starting value
	LC      - lowercases latin chars in a string (SQL:2003 says this is a type of "folding")
		SOURCE(1) - the starting value
	UC      - uppercases latin chars in a string (SQL:2003 says this is a type of "folding")
		SOURCE(1) - the starting value

	If any description contains "aggregate", it means the function is an
	aggregate function (a grouping func, like 'count').

	COUNT   - aggregate - count of rows a view/cursor can see
	MIN     - aggregate - minimum of values in all records in one view col
		FACTOR(1) - the table col or sub-query whose return values we aggregate
	MAX     - aggregate - maximum of values in all records in one view col
		FACTOR(1) - the table col or sub-query whose return values we aggregate
	SUM     - aggregate - sum of values in all records in one view col
		FACTOR(1) - the table col or sub-query whose return values we aggregate
	AVG     - aggregate - average of values in all records in one view col
		FACTOR(1) - the table col or sub-query whose return values we aggregate
	CONCAT  - aggregate - L.cstr concat of values in all records in one view col
		FACTOR(1) - the table col or sub-query whose return values we aggregate
	EVERY   - aggregate - is true when all rec values in one col are true
		FACTOR(1) - the table col or sub-query whose return values we aggregate
	ANY     - aggregate - is true when at least one rec value in one col is true
		FACTOR(1) - the table col or sub-query whose return values we aggregate
	SOME    - aggregate - is true when some rec values are true
		FACTOR(1) - the table col or sub-query whose return values we aggregate
	EXISTS  - aggregate - is true when if there are > 0 rows
		FACTOR(1) - the table col or sub-query whose return values we aggregate
	GB_SETS - olap, use in group-by - produces GROUPING SETS ( sub-exprs )
		FACTORS(N) - the sub-exprs defining the grouping operation
	GB_RLUP - olap, use in group-by - produces ROLLUP ( sub-exprs )
		FACTORS(N) - the sub-exprs defining the grouping operation
	GB_CUBE - olap, use in group-by - produces CUBE ( sub-exprs )
		FACTORS(N) - the sub-exprs defining the grouping operation

	Note that the function list is incomplete and will grow over time.  It does not currently 
	mention functions for working with view/cursor subqueries, such as "in" (field in subquery), 
	and also doesn't include any list operators, such as for comparing a list of field names to 
	a subquery that returns multiple columns (as I suspect MySQL 4.1 supports).

	I took out CROWID, CROWNUM, CLEVEL; there exist replacements for such as these, 
	such as in SQL:2003, 7.14 "<search or cycle clause>" (p365).

	Note: While it might conceptually go here, statements of type DECLARE will 
	be added to a block/routine implicitely by the fact that routine_var Nodes exist.
	The SQL:2003 standard says DECLARE appears inside a BEGIN ... END block, not before 
	it such as Oracle does.  It looks like "DECLARE <var name> <type name> [DEFAULT <expr>]".
	The standard also says "SET foo = expr;" rather than the "foo := expr;" as in Oracle.

=head2 privilege_type

These represent the basic types of privileges that database roles can be granted, and
that by extension users granted those roles can have.

	ALL - user/role has all privileges possible for the associated object
	SELECT - user may select rows from a table
	DELETE - user may delete rows from a table
	INSERT - user may insert rows into a table
	UPDATE - user may update rows in a table

The above options are understood.  These next options I'm less sure about, and 
most of them aren't mentioned in section 12.3 (p739) of SQL:2003.

	CONNECT - user may connect/open/attach to the catalog that is the parent of the role
	EXECUTE - user may execute a routine
	CREATE - user may create objects in a schema
	ALTER - user may alter objects in a schema
	DROP - user may drop objects in a schema

Aside from ALL, SELECT, DELETE, INSERT, UPDATE, the SQL:2003 standard also 
defines REFERENCES, USAGE, TRIGGER, UNDER, EXECUTE, but I don't yet understand 
what most of these mean.

=head2 simple_data_type

These represent the basic scalar data value types that can be used to further qualify
variables (or literals) whose container_type is SCALAR.  The 1999 SQL standard
indicates 5 classes of simple (Predefined) data types: Numeric, String,
Boolean, Datetime, Interval; all of the data types in those classes are
represented by one of the following enumerated values.  The 2003 SQL standard
adds a 6th one, XML, but we will ignore that one for the moment.

	NUM_INT   - an exact integral or whole number/numeric
	NUM_EXA   - an exact decimal or fractional number/numeric
	NUM_APR   - an approximately represented number/numeric (eg: floating point) 
	STR_BIT   - a string of bits or generic binary data (can store anything)
	STR_CHAR  - a string of characters (encoding spec defined separately) 
	BOOLEAN   - only two values: false or true 
	DATM_FULL - a full datetime ('timestamp') having both YMD and HMS components
	DATM_DATE - a valid Gregorian (says the 2003,1999 standard) date having just YMD
	DATM_TIME - a valid time of day having just HMS components
	INTRVL_YM - a time duration having year-month (YM) intervals (year or month or both)
	INTRVL_DT - a time duration having day-time (DHMS) intervals (but not year or month)

=head2 char_enc_type

These represent the set of known character string encodings or named sets of
characters (character repertoires) that can be used by character data, with
Unicode (or UTF-8 specifically) being the recommended one to use when possible,
and with Ascii being the most common legacy encoding. Encodings are only
applicable to data whose simple_data_type is STR_CHAR.

	UTF8   - unicode UTF-8  (always byte-order preserving; no big/little endian, usually 1 octet)
	UTF16  - unicode UTF-16 (has big/little endian versions)
	UTF32  - unicode UTF-32 (has big/little endian versions)
	ASCII  - 8-bit ascii    
	ANSEL  - 8-bit ansel (a standard-defined super-set of ascii, used by libraries, genealogy)
	EBCDIC - 8-bit ebcdic   

	Others will be added as appropriate.
	Note that some of these examples may be wrong for practical use and be changed later.

=head2 calendar

These represent the set of known calendars which a date and time (data) can be
relative to and counted with.  For each, year zero could be at a different
event, and other differences like what months or other yearly divisions there
are would also distinguish the calendars.  Use "absolute" if you don't want to
pick any calendar in particular.  These are only applicable to data whose
simple_data_type is DATM_FULL or DATM_DATE (or perhaps DATM_TIME also).

	ABS - "absolute", for non-calendar-specific dates and times
	GRE - the Gregorian calendar
	JUL - the Julian/Roman calendar
	CHI - the Chinese calendar
	HEB - the Hebrew calendar
	ISL - the Islamic calendar
	JPN - the Japanese calendar

	Note that some of these examples may be wrong for practical use and be changed later.

=head2 table_index_type

These represent the basic index types that database tables can have applied to them;
each instance of these can apply to multiple columns at once.  All indexes are
intended to make accessing table data faster, but some also will impose
constraints on what data can be put in the columns.

	ATOMIC   - "normal" index makes comparisons against col value as a whole faster, no constraints
	FULLTEXT - index makes searches for words within a col value faster (and weighted), no constraints
	UNIQUE   - index imposes a unique key constraint on a set of columns
	FOREIGN  - index imposes a many-to-one foreign key constraint on a set of columns
	UFOREIGN - index imposes a one-to-one foreign key (assuming target is a unique key)

	Note that the FULLTEXT index currently takes no arguments when it is getting 
	set up, such as a customizable stopword list; that will be added later.
	Note that the UFOREIGN type is interchangeable with UNIQUE+FOREIGN for same table cols.

=head2 view_type

These represent the basic types that a database view or SQL query can be.  All types 
of views are very similar in structure, but they are not the same; by setting the 
view_type of a view, you are saying which differences apply to that view and 
possibly any child views.  

	MATCH - matches single table/view exactly, result cols must equal match col, no grouping, can 'set','where','order'
	SINGLE - a "simple" view/query with a single source in 'from', no [jn, comp, sub-q, rcr]
	MULTIPLE - a "normal" view/query (with joins), not a compound query, has no sub-queries, is fully self-defined
	COMPOUND - consists of several "select ..." (each defined by a child view) connected by a compound operator
	SUBQUERY - contains subqueries but not recursive, either in "from", "where", elsewhere
	RECURSIVE - a recursive query, either invoking itself in a "with" clause, or using "start-with connect-by"

	Note that 'main' views are never RECURSIVE (they are SUBQUERY); only 
	nested queries (subqueries) declared in a 'with' clause can be recursive.
	That is, all recursive views have another view as their parent.
	An exception is those that use start-with...

=head2 compound_operator

These represent the standard ways that rows returned from multiple compatible
views/queries can be merged into a single result set, where all of the input
rows have the same set of columns as the the output rows, and each single
output row matches a distinct input row.  A union is the most common such
operation.  Each of these compound operators is by definition ambiguous as to
whether the output set includes all allowed input rows or just distinct ones;
you must keep an associated "set quantifier" value to specify ALL or DISTINCT.

	UNION        - all rows that are each in at least one input set (logical 'or' or 'plus')
	DIFFERENCE   - all rows from one input set that are not in the others ('except','minus')
	INTERSECTION - all rows that are each in every input set (logical 'and' or 'multiply')
	EXCLUSION    - all rows that are each in exactly one input set (logical 'xor')

	The above terms are generic set logic nouns, SQL differs in places.

=head2 join_operator

These represent the standard ways that columns from two tables or views can be joined
side by side into a single row set, where all values in each output column are
from exactly one input, and values in columns from separate sources are aligned
into common rows on related row values.  This is the most common way of
"relating" data in relational databases.

	CROSS - a cross-join; a cartesian product; every combination of first and second rows kept
	INNER - an inner/equal-join; only rows with related entries in both sources are kept
	LEFT  - a left-outer-join; all rows from first source kept even if not matched in second
	RIGHT - a right-outer-join; all rows from second source kept even if not matched in first
	FULL  - a full-outer-join; all rows from both sources kept even if un-matched

	There is no concept of a "natural" join at this level of activity, and should not be.
	Use CROSS if normal joins not sufficient; where-clause used for basic matching.
	Note: SQLite supports this: [NATURAL ][LEFT |RIGHT |FULL ][OUTER |INNER |CROSS ].

=head2 view_part

These represent the standard parts of a view/query definition that are not in the
"from" part.  

	RESULT - the result list at the top; one item per "view_col" per view
	SET    - when outer view used by an "insert" or "update", this is the "set" part
	FROM   - when view source in "from" part is a named subquery with args, these are arg values
	WHERE  - the SQL "where" part
	GROUP  - the SQL "group by" part
	HAVING - the SQL "having" part
	WINDOW - ... to replace ORDER,MAXR,SKIPR; or such as those will implement WINDOW instead
	ORDER  - the SQL "order by" part
	MAXR   - says to page the results, and how many rows per page, corresponds to SQL "limit" first part
	SKIPR  - says how many of the first rows to skip before returing the next ones, corr to "limit" second part

	Note that SQL::Routine may need more metadata to represent parts of a GROUP BY 
	clause, such as OLAP extensions ... or it may not.

	Note that details for the INTO portion of a "select|fetch into" query is
	stored in view_col Nodes, and so isn't represented by the view_part
	enumerated list.

	According to SQL:2003 Foundation 7.11 (p331), the WINDOW clause in a query seems 
	to contain/replace the likes of ORDER BY, LIMIT/MAXR, OFFSET/SKIPR, but it is 
	more powerful than that.  SQL::Routine may need more metadata to do this right.

	Note that several databases like Postgres and SQLite use LIMIT for MAXR 
	and OFFSET for SKIPR.  I may do that too.

=head2 routine_type

These represent the basic types that a routine can be, since SQL::Routine
"routines" are generic enough that each of the following can be represented by
them: stored procedures and functions, triggers, and packages containing stored
procedures and functions; all of the previous can also have nested stored
procedures and functions; all of the previous can have nested un-named routines
as well, called BLOCK.  

All routine types (except packages?) can incorporate a series of statements plus
conditionals or iterators, and all kinds can declare or use local variables,
and they can all contain other routines of certain types.  As such, routines
arranged in a hierarchy of parents and children, where a root routine is one that
is not contained in another.  All routine types can take arguments of some sort,
but your choice of type can severely limit what kinds of arguments you can
take.  Only some routine types, functions mainly, can return a value.  Only some
routine types have names.

	PACKAGE   - an Oracle package; a namespace beneath a schema for related funcs and procs
	TRIGGER   - a trigger on a table or schema view
	PROCEDURE - a named stored procedure, under a schema|package|app|other-rtn
	FUNCTION  - a named stored function, under a schema|package|app|other-rtn
	BLOCK     - declares a compound statement that can contain other statements; eg BEGIN ... END

	This list is probably missing some items.

=head2 basic_trigger_event

These represent the basic event types that can cause a trigger routine to execute.

	BEFR_INS - before insert
	AFTR_INS - after insert
	INST_INS - instead of insert
	BEFR_UPD - before update
	AFTR_UPD - after update
	INST_UPD - instead of update
	BEFR_DEL - before delete
	AFTR_DEL - after delete
	INST_DEL - instead of delete

	Note: Some databases (eg: SQLServer 2000) can let a trigger run "instead" of the triggering 
	event, though the SQL:2003 standard does not mention such a feature.

	Note: It appears that triggers (in Oracle at least) can have names and a much more complicated 
	condition as its "event"; it also can be attached to things other than tables.
	It can also exist in a separate schema.  Keep that in mind for a future update.  
	See this: http://www.cit.uws.edu.au/docs/oracle/sqlref/ch4h.htm

=head2 user_type

These represent the basic types of database users that you can have.

	ROOT - the default user that owns the entire database install; login name usually set by RDBMS product
	SCHEMA_OWNER - owns one or more database schema that are shared with others, perform DDL operations there
	DATA_EDITOR - does not own any shared schema, usually can do DML only, typ stores data in a shared schema
	ANONYMOUS - can connect to a database without username or password, owns nothing, usually very limited

=head1 NODE TYPES

These are the Node Types that SQL::Routine knows about; each one
corresponds to a SQL::Routine concept.  A Node Ref attribute of a certain
type will reference another Node of that Node Type.

Each Node Type description below includes the attributes that are valid for
Nodes of that type.  For each attribute, it says what the attribute means, what
major+minor type it is, and what kind of value constraints it must obey,
including both independent and dependent constraints.  Some attribute value
constraints are constantly applied, while many of them are deferrable.

Each pseudo-Node also has a section that looks like one for a normal Node type;
these sections are where certain details about Nodes that have pseudo-Node
parents go, because those details are explained in terms of "child Nodes".

For each Node Type, there are several detail lists: B<Attribute List>,
B<Exclusive Attribute Groups List>, B<Local Attribute Dependencies List>,
B<Child Quantity List>, B<Distinct Child Groups List>, B<Example List>.

The B<Attribute List> says what all of the attributes are, in order, along with
each one's major+minor type, an indicator of whether it is a primary parent
node candidate, and a description.  Each list element is in this format:

	<attr-name> - <major-type>.<minor-type>[ - <parent-flag>|<mandatory-flag>] - <description>

In the above usage, the major-type is shortened from its full name like this:
"literal" -> "L", "enumerated" -> "E", "node_ref" -> "N".  When the major-type
is "node_id" (the attr-name is always "id"), then "NODE_ID" appears in place of
the combined major and minor types on the line.  Every Node type's
"id"/"NODE_ID" attribute is implicitly always-mandatory; moreover, that
attribute is implicitly always-distinct within Nodes of the same Node type.

I<Note that any Node attributes whose attr-name is "name" (an L.cstr) have a
special meaning that corresponds to the ANSI/ISO SQL:2003 standard's impression
of a SQL "identifier", specifically an un-qualified SQL identifier.  (Eg, a
table's "name" is the table's "identifier".)>

The parent-flag indicates whether the attribute can be used to link the current
Node to a "primary parent" Node.  When a Container (or subset of its Nodes) is
converted to a tree-like representation (such as XML), each Node will be output
beneath its primary parent.  For each Node, it is mandatory for exactly one
primary parent candidate attribute to be set, and the others not set (unless
the Node type has no candidates, has a pseudonode parent).  The flag says "PP".

I<While there is no special code to draw attention to it, note that some
primary-parent Node ref attributes are special in that they are
directly-recursive; they facilitate the construction of N-depth Node trees
where all Nodes in the tree have the same Node type.  You can spot one of these
by the fact that the attribute is both marked 'PP' and its minor type is the
same as the Node type the attribute belongs to.  The most common such trees are
made from "[view|routine]_expr" Nodes, but others are also possible.>

The mandatory-flag indicates whether the attribute is always-mandatory, meaning
the attribute must always be populated (not be null); in some cases, it means
you explicitly provide a 'default' value such as zero.  The flag says "MA".

The "Attribute List" contains all details that pertain to constantly applied
attribute value constraints.  One of these is that you can never set values of
the wrong major+minor type to an attribute, guaranteeing they are type-correct
at all times.  You can also never set a Node's primary parent to a node ref
attribute which isn't "PP".  Another of these is that, when a Node is in a
Container, its NODE_ID attribute must always be set, and have a distinct value
relative to other Nodes of its type in the same Container.  Another of these is
that, when a Node is in a Container, any Node ref attributes can only point to
Nodes that are simultaneously in the same container.  As another, you can never
set a primary parent for a Node which is a direct or indirect descendent of
that Node, so circular references are guaranteed to never exist.

The "Attribute List" also contains a few details that pertain to deferrable
constraints.  One deferrable constraint is that a Node's NODE_ID attribute must
be set; that is, this constraint is only deferrable for Nodes that are not in
Containers.  Another deferrable constraint is that exactly one primary-parent
attribute must be set, if the Node has any "PP" attributes.  Another deferrable
constraint is that any "MA" attributes are populated.  All "Attribute List" 
deferrable constraints can be tested on Nodes of any status, including "Alone".

The B<Exclusive Attribute Groups List> says what groups of mutually exclusive
attributes there are for a Node type besides the "PP" group; no more than one 
member of a group may have a set value at any given time.  Each list element
is in this format:

	<mutex-name> - <attr-name>(,<attr-name>){1,}[ - <mandatory-flag>]

For each mutex-name group, there are 2 or more attr-name which are members of
the group; if mandatory-flag is present, which looks like "MA", then one member
of the group must always be set; if mandatory-flag is not present, then it is
fine for all group members to not be set.  All "Exclusive Attribute Groups
List" constraints are deferrable and can be tested on Nodes of any status,
including "Alone".

The B<Local Attribute Dependencies List> says what Node type attributes have
dependencies in other attributes of the same Node they are in, such that the
dependent attributes can not be set unless the depended-on attributes are
valued and/or have specific determined values.  Each list element
is in this format:

	<dep-on-attr-name>:
		<dep-attr-name>(,<dep-attr-name>){0,}[ - <dep-on-attr-val>(,<dep-on-attr-val>){0,}][ - <mandatory-flag>]

For each distinct depended-on attribute, there can be one or more dependent
attributes; the latter can be of any attribute type.  A dependent attribute may
never be set unless its dependency is set, and, in the case of the depended-on
attribute being an enumerated type, the depended-on attribute has the
appropriate value; if mandatory-flag is present, then the dependent attribute
must always be set when it may be set.  It is possible that more than one
distinct depended-on attribute value will satisfy the same dependent attribute,
though in most cases only one value will do.  If there are multiple dependent
attributes shown on the same line (comma-delimited), then they are a
mutual-exclusion group; only one of those may be set when the conditions say
that any may be set.  All "Local Attribute Dependencies List" constraints are
deferrable and can be tested on Nodes of any status, including "Alone".

The B<Child Quantity List> says when a Node must have a specific number of
primary-child Nodes of a particular Node type (usually >= 1).  Each list
element is in this format:

	<child-node-type> - <range-min>[ - <range-max>]

For each child-node-type, there can be a limit on how few or how many
primary-child Nodes of that Node type are allowed.  A common range-min is 1,
but if it is 0 then range-max will be valued.  All "Child Quantity List"
constraints are deferrable and can only be tested on "Well Known" Nodes.

The B<Distinct Child Groups List> says what groups of mutually distinct
primary-child Nodes there are for Nodes of a Node type; each member Node of a
group must have distinct/unique values for particular attributes (usually
"name") or attribute combinations.  Each list element is in this format:

	<mudi-name>:
		<child-node-type> - <child-attr-name>(,<child-attr-name>){0,}

For each mudi-name group there can be one or more Node attributes where the
attribute value combination must be distinct, besides the constantly applied
distinct NODE_ID/id constraint; a single child-attr-name on a line means only
that one attribute is distinct within itself, where multiple child-attr-name
indicate a combination to check.  If there are multiple lines under a
mudi-name, then each one will have a different child-node-type; the attributes
that line up vertically between different Node types are meant to correspond,
and would be of the same major+minor attribute type; each corresponding line
would also have the same number of child-attr-name.  For all comparisons, an
undefined attribute value always counts as a distinct value; multiple undefined
corresponding values will not violate the constraint (other constraints
eliminate undefined values when they are a problem).  The implicit distinct-id
constraints all have a mudi-name of 'primary'.  All "Distinct Child Groups
List" constraints are deferrable and can only be tested on "Well Known" Nodes.

The B<Example List> is a list of example Nodes for the Node type, formatted
like a table, one row per Node, one column per attribute.  Note that the order
in which "Example List" rows/Nodes appear is significant.

=head2 root

This pseudo-Node is the root of a SQL::Routine and has as its children the
other 4 pseudo-Nodes: blueprints, tools, sites, circumventions.

=head2 blueprints

This pseudo-Node has two child Node-types: catalog, application.

Distinct Child Groups List:

	ak_name:
		catalog - name
		application - name

=head2 catalog

This type of Node describes a distinct unrealized "database" or "catalog" which
contains everything else, both schema and users.  Often you will have just one
"catalog" Node; however, the rationale for being able to describe
multiple databases in the same SQL::Routine is, for example, when one
database wants to talk directly to another, or an application wants to use
several.  This Node type does not describe an instance of a database; rather,
it contains all the details that are common to a set of databases having
identical schema; it is their template.  I<See also the "catalog_instance" Node
type.>  Note that while "user" Nodes can be children of this, you should only
define users here that either own a schema which is shared with multiple users
or are otherwise universal in all instances of this blueprint; no 'normal'
users should be here.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	name - L.cstr - MA - lets you label the blueprint if you want; this isn't used when making SQL
	single_schema - L.bool - true, catalog lim to 1 schema, rendered in 1-sch prod w no nm prefix

Distinct Child Groups List:

	ak_name:
		catalog_link - name
		schema - name
		role - name

Example List:

	|id|name|
	|--|----|
	| 1|    | - a default database/catalog, usually just used if it is the only database
	| 2|gene| - a multi-schema genealogy database/catalog that you manage

=head2 application

This type of Node collects information that is specific to a database-using
application but is not stored in a database.  Those details mainly are the
unrealized catalog links that it uses and the SQL (all in routine form) that it
executes.  Often you will have just one "application" Node; however,
the rationale for being able to describe multiple applications in the same
SQL::Routine is, for example, when you have several different applications
that use the same database or database set.  This Node type does not describe
an instance or installation of an application.  I<See also the
"application_instance" Node type.>

Relating this to the SQL standard, an application is essentially a SQL:1999
Call-Level Interface (CLI) client; each 'routine' it runs is a set of one or
more SQL statements pushed over the command line, and even the 'attach' /
'connect' is done this way.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	name - L.cstr - MA - lets you label the blueprint if you want

Distinct Child Groups List:

	ak_name:
		catalog_link - name
		domain - name
		sequence - name
		table - name
		view - name
		routine - name

=head2 owner

This type of Node represents an unrealized user which owns a database catalog. 
It is here for "schema" Nodes to reference as their owner.  A separate
"user" Node will be matched with this "owner" Node on a per-catalog-instance
basis; this allows each site to have different usernames or passwords for the
schema owner.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	catalog - N.catalog - PP - the catalog that this user is in

Example List:

	|id|ca|
	|--|--|
	| 1| 1|
	| 2| 2|

=head2 catalog_link

This type of Node represents a distinct "catalog link" or "data source" local
name which SQL under a 'catalog' or 'application' Node
refers to when it wants to talk to an external database catalog.  This Node is
particularly necessary when either two instances of the same catalog
want to communicate or an application wants to talk to two instances of the
same catalog; SQL::Routine has no way to know which instance regular SQL is
referring to except by referencing these catalog link Nodes.  The
'catalog_link' Node just says what the remote 'catalog' is
so local SQL knows what it can refer to; the 'catalog_link_instance' Node is
required to say which specific catalog instance to talk to.  

Note that SQL does not have to mention a link if it either is referring to its
own catalog instance or there is only one instance of a blueprint in the system;
if all catalog instances are based on different blueprints, then no SQL has to 
reference the links; the schema objects to reference are un-ambiguous.

According to the SQL:1999 standard, a fully qualified schema object name has 3
main parts: the catalog name (provided by this Node), the schema name, and the
object's unqalified name; when leaving the catalog name out but using the
schema name, one is using a partially qualified name.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	catalog - N.catalog - PP - the schema in this blueprint may use the unrealized catalog link
	application - N.application - PP - the routines in this app bp may use the unrealized catalog link
	name - L.cstr - MA - the "catalog link" that is the front of the fully qualified remote schema object name
	target - N.catalog - MA - this is what the link connects to

=head2 schema

This type of Node describes a "schema" or "name space" into which your schema
objects can be collected.  Some database products support multiple schemas per
catalogue (and some don't); such support is specified by the SQL:1999 standard,
which also says that each schema is owned by a single database user.  Often you
will have just one "schema" Node, under which all of your schema objects are
grouped.

According to the SQL:1999 standard, a fully qualified schema object name has 3
main parts: the catalog name, the schema name (provided by this Node), and the
object's unqalified name; when leaving the catalog name out but using the
schema name, one is using a partially qualified name.

SQL::Routine will let you define your schema objects (tables, views,
routines, etc) as if multiple schemas were supported natively, and if you are
deploying to a database product that doesn't, then SQL::Routine can put a
common name prefix in front of all the schema objects (the schema/namespace
name), to simulate the lacking functionality.  That said, it is better for you
to design your schemas so different namespaces don't contain same-named objects
anyway, if practical.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	catalog - N.catalog - PP - the catalog that this schema/namespace is in
	name - L.cstr - MA - the name this schema/namespace is identified by
	owner - N.owner - MA - the user that owns this schema

Distinct Child Groups List:

	ak_name:
		domain - name
		sequence - name
		table - name
		view - name
		routine - name

Example List:

	|id|ca|name|ow|
	|--|--|----|--|
	| 1| 1|foo | 1| - a default schema/namespace
	| 2| 2|gene| 2| - store all the normal app data that constitutes a genealogy database
	| 3| 2|dd  | 2| - store a data dictionary describing an application for editing gene data

=head2 role

This type of Node describes a database role, which is a named collection of
user privileges.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	catalog - N.catalog - PP - the catalog that this role is in
	name - L.cstr - MA - the name this role is identified by

=head2 privilege_on

This type of Node associates a role with some entity (usually a schema or
schema object) on which it has some kind of privileges; privilege_on Nodes are
children of role Nodes.  All users given that role will have these privileges. 
Exactly what privileges on the entity the role has are defined by child
privilege_for Nodes, which are children of the privilege_on Node.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	role - N.role - PP - the role that this privilege is granted to
	schema - N.schema - if the privilege relates to a whole schema, this is the schema
	domain - N.domain - if the privilege type is domain-related, this is the domain
	sequence - N.sequence - if the privilege type is sequence-related, this is the sequence
	table - N.table - if the privilege type is table-related, this is the table
	view - N.view - if the privilege type is view-related, this is the view
	routine - N.routine - if the privilege type is routine-related, this is the routine

Exclusive Attribute Groups List:

	privilege_on - schema,domain,sequence,table,view,routine - MA

Distinct Child Groups List:

	ak_option:
		privilege_for - priv_type

=head2 privilege_for

This type of Node details one privilege that a role has on some other entity
that is defined by this Node's privilege_on parent Node.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	priv_on - N.privilege_on - PP - what "privilege_on" Node this option is associated with
	priv_type - E.privilege_type - MA - what manner of privilege this is

=head2 domain

This type of Node describes a named user-defined customization of a base
simple_data_type, the latter of which SQL::Routine recognizes in code. This
customization encompases several things: 1. The domain has its own name /
identifier that can be referenced by entities such as table column definitions,
view column definitions, and routine variables, as their "data type"; 2. The
domain can impose restrictions within the base data type as to what values can
be stored (eg: a STR_CHAR may only be 30 characters long, or a NUM_EXA may only
be 5 digits wide with 2 digits on the right of the radix point); 3. The
domain can define simple pre or post processing of values, such as trimming of
bounding whitespace or uppercasing its contents.

For example, the user may decide to create a custom data type called
"currency", which is a decimal number of precision 15 and a scale of 2.  Or,
they may want to have an "ip address" type, which is a string that can hold 15
characters (how ips are normally displayed to humans).  Or, they may want a
custom SIN or telephone-no or person-name type.  They can then refer to these
custom types everywhere as if they were types built-in to the database.

Note that SQL::Routine does not support the antiquated notion of having
separate fixed-width and variable-width character strings as being distinct
base data types.  That is an implementation detail which database products
should not expose in the user interface, or if they do, it should be demoted to
an "optimization" feature used with a single character string type.  When you
make a domain using the STR_CHAR base_type, it will have the semantics of
SQL's "VARCHAR" by default; you can make it like "CHAR" by setting the
store_fixed attribute to true.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	schema - N.schema - PP - the schema that this domain is in, if any
	application - N.application - PP - the app-space that this domain is in, if any
	name - L.cstr - MA - the name this domain (user customized data type) is identified by
	base_type - E.simple_data_type - MA - name of the base data type this data_type is customized from
	num_precision - L.uint - max length in digits for exact number, or count of significant digits for inexact 
	num_scale - L.uint - for non-integral numbers, how many digits can be on the right of the radix point
	num_octets - L.uint - for integral or inexact (floating point) numbers, fixed storage size in octets
	num_unsigned - L.bool - for numbers, true means only values >= 0 may be stored
	max_octets - L.uint - maximum size in octets for a binary/bit string
	max_chars - L.uint - maximum size in characters for a character string
	store_fixed - L.bool - when true then try to reserve max size on disk even if not all used
	char_enc - E.char_enc_type - which character encoding to use
	trim_white - L.bool - when true then trim lead/trailing whitespace on save into STR_CHAR field/var
	uc_latin - L.bool - do we uppercase latin chars in STR_CHAR before writing (no change on reading)
	lc_latin - L.bool - do we lowercase latin chars in STR_CHAR before writing (no change on reading)
	pad_char - L.cstr - when store_fixed is true then pad actual value with this to max size on save
	trim_pad - L.bool - when store_fixed is true then trim padding on read from STR_CHAR field/var
	calendar - E.calendar - what calendar the date and time (or date only) is in
	with_zone - L.sint - if timestamp/time to include a 'with time zone', this says what time zone
	range_min - L.misc - when applicable, what the allowed minimum value is (for bounds/check constraint)
	range_max - L.misc - when applicable, what the allowed maximum value is (for bounds/check constraint)

Exclusive Attribute Groups List:

	num_size - num_precision,num_octets

Local Attribute Dependencies List:

	base_type:
		num_precision - NUM_INT,NUM_EXA,NUM_APR
		num_scale - NUM_EXA,NUM_APR
		num_octets - NUM_INT,NUM_APR
		num_unsigned - NUM_INT,NUM_EXA,NUM_APR
		max_octets - STR_BIT - MA
		max_chars - STR_CHAR - MA
		char_enc - STR_CHAR - MA
		trim_white - STR_CHAR
		uc_latin,lc_latin - STR_CHAR
		pad_char - STR_CHAR
		trim_pad - STR_CHAR
		calendar - DATM_FULL,DATM_DATE - MA
		with_zone - DATM_FULL,DATM_DATE,DATM_TIME
	num_precision:
		num_scale

Distinct Child Groups List:

	ak_option:
		domain_opt - value

Example List:

	|id|name    |base     |np |ns|no|nu|mxoct|mxch|fx|chenc|tw|uc|pc|tp|cal|
	|--|--------|---------|---|--|--|--|-----|----|--|-----|--|--|--|--|---|
	| 1|bin1k   |STR_BIT  |   |  |  |  | 1000|    |  |     |  |  |  |  |   | - a hunk of binary data of maximum 1000 octets
	| 2|bin32k  |STR_BIT  |   |  |  |  |32000|    |  |     |  |  |  |  |   | - a hunk of binary data of maximum 32000 octets
	| 3|str4    |STR_CHAR |   |  |  |  |     |   4|1 |ASCII|1 |1 |20|1 |   | - a fix-w 4 char ascii cstr, uppercased, spc-pad
	| 4|str10   |STR_CHAR |   |  |  |  |     |  10|1 |ASCII|1 |  |20|1 |   | - a fix-w 10 char ascii cstr, case-preserve, spc-pad
	| 5|str30   |STR_CHAR |   |  |  |  |     |  30|  |ASCII|1 |  |  |  |   | - a fix-w 30 char ascii cstr, case-preserving
	| 6|str2k   |STR_CHAR |   |  |  |  |     |2000|  |UTF8 |  |  |  |  |   | - a var-w 2000 char unicode cstr, case-preserving
	| 7|byte    |NUM_INT  |   |  | 1|  |     |    |  |     |  |  |  |  |   | - an 8-bit precise int btwn           -128 and           +127
	| 8|short   |NUM_INT  |   |  | 2|  |     |    |  |     |  |  |  |  |   | - a 16-bit precise int btwn        -32,768 and        +32,767
	| 9|int     |NUM_INT  |   |  | 4|  |     |    |  |     |  |  |  |  |   | - a 32-bit precise int btwn -2,147,483,648 and +2,147,483,647
	|10|long    |NUM_INT  |   |  | 8|  |     |    |  |     |  |  |  |  |   | - a 64-bit precise int btwn        -(2^63) and      +(2^63)-1
	|11|ubyte   |NUM_INT  |   |  | 1|1 |     |    |  |     |  |  |  |  |   | - an 8-bit precise integer between 0 and           +255
	|12|ushort  |NUM_INT  |   |  | 2|1 |     |    |  |     |  |  |  |  |   | - a 16-bit precise integer between 0 and        +65,535
	|13|uint    |NUM_INT  |   |  | 4|1 |     |    |  |     |  |  |  |  |   | - a 32-bit precise integer between 0 and +4,294,967,295
	|14|ulong   |NUM_INT  |   |  | 8|1 |     |    |  |     |  |  |  |  |   | - a 64-bit precise integer between 0 and      +(2^64)-1
	|15|float   |NUM_APR  |   |  | 4|  |     |    |  |     |  |  |  |  |   | - a 32-bit imprecise fractional number
	|16|double  |NUM_APR  |   |  | 8|  |     |    |  |     |  |  |  |  |   | - a 64-bit imprecise fractional number
	|17|dec10p2 |NUM_EXA  | 10| 2|  |  |     |    |  |     |  |  |  |  |   | - a precise 10-digit num with hundredths scale
	|18|dec255  |NUM_EXA  |255|  |  |  |     |    |  |     |  |  |  |  |   | - a precise 255-digit num with arbitrary scale
	|19|boolean |BOOLEAN  |   |  |  |  |     |    |  |     |  |  |  |  |   | - a boolean; only 2 values of false or true
	|20|datetime|DATM_FULL|   |  |  |  |     |    |  |     |  |  |  |  |ABS| - a date and time or date, non-calendar specific
	|21|dtchines|DATM_FULL|   |  |  |  |     |    |  |     |  |  |  |  |CHI| - a date and time or date, in the Chinese calendar
	|22|sex     |STR_CHAR |   |  |  |  |     |   1|  |     |  |  |  |  |   | - a 1-char string, constrained to 'M' and 'F'
	|23|str20   |STR_CHAR |   |  |  |  |     |  20|  |     |  |  |  |  |   | - a 20-char string
	|24|str100  |STR_CHAR |   |  |  |  |     | 100|  |     |  |  |  |  |   | - a 100-char string
	|25|str250  |STR_CHAR |   |  |  |  |     | 250|  |     |  |  |  |  |   | - a 250-char string
	|26|entitynm|STR_CHAR |   |  |  |  |     |  30|  |     |  |  |  |  |   | - a short string suitable for naming things
	|27|generic |STR_CHAR |   |  |  |  |     | 250|  |     |  |  |  |  |   | - a longer string that most kinds of data will fit in

=head2 domain_opt

When a "domain" Node is meant to impose an enumerated list restriction, meaning 
that only a specific set of values may be stored, then you use a "domain_opt" 
Node to define each enumerated value that is allowed.  Keep in mind that the 
SQL NULL (undefined) value is always distinct from anything in this option list.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	domain - N.domain - PP - what "domain" Node this option is associated with
	value - L.misc - MA - this is the actual enumerated value that the domain_opt Node represents

Example List:

	|id|do|v|
	|--|--|-|
	| 1|22|M| - "sex" is "Male"
	| 2|22|F| - "sex" is "Female"

=head2 sequence

This type of Node describes a simple named sequence number generator, which
will produce integers (normal purpose) but not fractional numbers.  Sequence
generators are part of the SQL:2003 standard (see "4.21 Sequence generators"),
and many database products have them; apparently they are not part of older SQL
standards.  The standard says that only integers can be produced by sequences.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	schema - N.schema - PP - the schema that this sequence generator is in
	application - N.application - PP - the app-space that this sequence generator is in
	name - L.cstr - MA - the name this sequence generator is identified by
	increment - L.sint - the interval between sequence numbers; defaults to 1 if not set
	min_val - L.sint - the minimum value that the sequence can generate; no minimum if not set
	max_val - L.sint - the maximum value that the sequence can generate; no maximum if not set
	start_val - L.sint - specify first value; def min_val if asc seq, max if desc, 1 if min/max not set
	cycle - L.bool - if true, sequence continues after reaching bound, at other end; defaults to false
	order - L.bool - if true, seq guaranteed to ret numbers in order; def false, will just be unique

=head2 table

This type of Node describes the core (single cardinality) description of a
database table, which is the single core concept of any database; it is where
the "data" that the database exists to store is kept.  Each table has one or
more columns, which define its "interface", and one or more indexes or
constraints for data integrity.  SQL:2003,1999 calls this a "base table".

SQL::Routine supports the concept of temporary tables such that you say a
table is temporary by putting it in the application space rather than the
catalog-schema space.  This makes the most sense, since temporary tables only
persist during an active database connection, and they do not exist in the same
name-space of any database schema.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	schema - N.schema - PP - the schema that this table is in
	application - N.application - PP - the app-space that this table is in
	name - L.cstr - MA - the name this table is identified by

Child Quantity List:

	table_col - 1

Distinct Child Groups List:

	ak_name:
		table_col - name
		table_ind - name

Example List:

	|id|sc|name        |
	|--|--|------------|
	| 1| 1|user_auth   | - authentication related details for application users
	| 2| 1|user_profile| - public personal details for application users
	| 3| 1|user_pref   | - application preference values for users
	| 4| 1|person      | - core data node in a genealogical program

=head2 table_col

This type of Node describes a single table column, and has details that are
specific to that column.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	table - N.table - PP - unique identifier for this table
	name - L.cstr - MA - unique identifier for column within table
	domain - N.domain - MA - the user-customized data type for this column
	mandatory - L.bool - MA - the col's "nullability characteristic; true, "known not nullable"; false, "possibly nullable"
	default_val - L.misc - an optional default value for the column, or starting val for auto_inc
	auto_inc - L.bool - when true, col val defaults from a special auto-incrementing sequence
	default_seq - N.sequence - when set, the column defaults to a value from this named sequence

	Note: See SQL:2003 Foundation 4.13 "Columns, fields, and attributes" (p49).

Exclusive Attribute Groups List:

	default - default_val,default_seq

Example List:

	|id|tb|name         |do|ma|def|inc|
	|--|--|-------------|--|--|---|---|
	| 1| 1|user_id      | 9|1 |1  |1  | - unique internal id for user, not changeable
	| 2| 1|login_name   |23|1 |   |   | - who user authenticates into app as
	| 3| 1|login_pass   |23|1 |   |   | - also used with authentication
	| 4| 1|private_name |24|1 |   |   | - real name that app service provider can know
	| 5| 1|private_email|24|1 |   |   | - email that service provider can contact user with
	| 6| 1|may_login    |19|1 |   |   | - true when user may use app at all
	| 7| 1|max_sessions | 7|1 |3  |   | - max concurrent app logins user may have
	| 8| 2|user_id      | 9|1 |   |   | - unique internal id for user, not changeable
	| 9| 2|public_name  |25|1 |   |   | - public name or pen name or public alias
	|10| 2|public_email |25|0 |   |   | - email address the public may use for contact
	|11| 2|web_url      |25|0 |   |   | - personal/business website address of user
	|12| 2|contact_net  |25|0 |   |   | - info like ICQ number or other internet handles
	|13| 2|contact_phy  |25|0 |   |   | - physical address or city or telephone number
	|14| 2|bio          |25|0 |   |   | - brief description of the person
	|15| 2|plan         |25|0 |   |   | - what the person plans to do next
	|16| 2|comments     |25|0 |   |   | - other comments
	|17| 3|user_id      | 9|1 |   |   | - unique internal id for user, not changeable
	|18| 3|pref_name    |26|1 |   |   | - app-specific preference name
	|19| 3|pref_value   |27|0 |   |   | - preference value for this user
	|20| 4|person_id    | 9|1 |1  |1  | - unique actual id for person, not changeable
	|21| 4|alternate_id |23|0 |   |   | - user's own way of ident people, if wanted
	|22| 4|name         |24|1 |   |   | - actual name of the person they are called by
	|23| 4|sex          |22|0 |   |   | - sex of the person, if known
	|24| 4|father_id    | 9|0 |   |   | - person_id of this person's father, if known
	|25| 4|mother_id    | 9|0 |   |   | - person_id of this person's mother, if known

=head2 table_ind

This type of Node describes a single table index, and has details that are
specific to that index.

Note that the primary key for a table is defined to be the first (by sequence)
ind_type=UNIQUE/UFOREIGN index where all of the index columns are required.  If
no table indexes qualify then the table has no primary key.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	table - N.table - PP - unique identifier for this table
	name - L.cstr - MA - unique identifier for index within table
	ind_type - E.table_index_type - MA - what type of index this is (eg: UNIQUE, FOREIGN)
	f_table - N.table - foreign key constraining table

Local Attribute Dependencies List:

	ind_type:
		f_table - FOREIGN,UFOREIGN - MA

Child Quantity List:

	table_ind_col - 1

Distinct Child Groups List:

	ak_table_col:
		table_ind_col - table_col
	ak_f_table_col:
		table_ind_col - f_table_col

Example List:

	|id|tb|name            |type   |ftbl|
	|--|--|----------------|-------|----|
	| 1| 1|primary         |UNIQUE |    | - ensure all [user_id] are unique
	| 2| 1|ak_login_name   |UNIQUE |    | - ensure all [login_name] are unique
	| 3| 1|ak_private_email|UNIQUE |    | - ensure all [private_email] are unique
	| 4| 2|primary         |UNIQUE |    | - ensure all [user_id] are unique
	| 5| 2|ak_public_name  |UNIQUE |    | - ensure all [public_name] are unique
	| 6| 2|fk_user         |FOREIGN|   1| - ensure user_profile matches user_auth
	| 7| 3|primary         |UNIQUE |    | - ensure all [user_id,pref_name] are unique
	| 8| 3|fk_user         |FOREIGN|   1| - ensure user_pref matches user_auth
	| 9| 4|primary         |UNIQUE |    | - ensure all [person_id] are unique
	|10| 4|ak_alternate_id |UNIQUE |    | - ensure all [alternate_id] are unique
	|11| 4|fk_father       |FOREIGN|   4| - link child to father
	|12| 4|fk_mother       |FOREIGN|   4| - link child to mother

=head2 table_ind_col

This type of Node intersects between a table_ind and a table_col; it says which
table columns are involved in each table index.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	table_ind - N.table_ind - PP - unique identifier for index within table
	table_col - N.table_col - MA - unique identifier for column within table
	f_table_col - N.table_col - when the index type is a foreign key, this is the constraining column

Example List:

	|id|ind|col|fcol|
	|--|---|---|----|
	| 1|  1|  1|    | - ensure all [user_id] are unique
	| 2|  2|  2|    | - ensure all [login_name] are unique
	| 3|  3|  5|    | - ensure all [private_email] are unique
	| 4|  4|  8|    | - ensure all [user_id] are unique
	| 5|  5|  9|    | - ensure all [login_name] are unique
	| 6|  6|  8|   1| - ensure user_profile matches user_auth
	| 7|  7| 17|    | - ensure all [user_id,pref_name] are unique
	| 8|  7| 18|    | - ensure all [user_id,pref_name] are unique
	| 9|  8| 17|   1| - ensure user_pref matches user_auth
	|10|  9| 20|    | - ensure all [person_id] are unique
	|11| 10| 21|    | - ensure all [alternate_id] are unique
	|12| 11| 24|  20| - link child to father
	|13| 12| 25|  20| - link child to mother

=head2 view

This type of Node describes the core (single cardinality) description of a
database view or a SQL query; SQL::Routine uses the same set of Node Types
to describe both as they are almost identical in structure.  The main way they
differ is that stored views have a name and live as their own object in a
database schema; SQL queries only exist either inside a routine or an
application context, and usually don't have names.  Both types can have named
or un-named sub-queries inside them which are the same format as the main
view/query.  Views/queries are interfaces to one or more tables that are
related in a specific way.  Each view looks outwardly like a table, in that it
has rows or columns, but it does not describe how data is stored, but mainly
just how it is retrieved.  Each view has a set of "columns", which is its
public interface by which rows are retrieved like from a table.  You can also
insert, update, or delete rows through some views/queries as with a table.

Views are often fully defined using a set of multiple linked Nodes of varying
Node Types, which makes them fully customizable.  However, a short-cut is
available which allows a view to be defined entirely with as few as two Nodes,
one "view" having type of MATCH and one "view_src".  This short cut is mainly
for use when we want to simulate full direct table access, which is needed for
mass back-ups or restores of tables, or when implementing a utility that lets
users make direct changes to a table.  Other part-way short cuts are available
too.

The view_join[/_col] Nodes that belong to a "view" ("viewed table") Node,
together with the view_src[/_col] Nodes that the former reference, define the
single (recursive) "joined table" (see SQL:2003 Foundations 7.7, p312) that is
the basis for the "viewed table".  In the joined table, every field value
matches exactly a (or several identical) value in a source table or view. 
Given that SQL::Routine does not directly support the concept of a "natural
join" (but it is indirectly supported), the number of columns in the joined
table is always the sum of the number of columns in all the joined source
table/views.  Also, the number of joined table rows is at most equal to the
product of the number of rows in each source (and as few as zero).  The other 
parts of a query build on the joined table.  The where/group/having/window 
clauses can reduce (but never increase) the number of result rows.  The 
select-list clause can change (to more or fewer) the number of result columns.

Since the ability to change database records is more complicated than simply
viewing records, and usually requires more information to be available (such as
primary keys for rows being updated), SQL::Routine allows you to store a
hint with a view, called "may_write", that says whether or not you will even
try to make updates against a view, so we will know in advance and save
ourselves unnecessary work or complexity.  The flag defaults to false.

SQL::Routine also uses "views" to describe editing DML operations, such as
Insert, Update, Delete operations.  The view definition says what the
conditions for each DML operation is, namely what rows they will affect.  With
Update and Delete operations, all rows that would be returned by the view will
be correspondingly updated or deleted.  An Insert (single or multiple row)
won't affect the existing rows, but will add to what the view sees after the
Insert happens.  The frequent case in such situations, though, is that said
view is only matching one row, since a user typically just edits or deletes or
inserts one row at a time.  However, in such situation where your conceptual
view is selecting more rows than you intend to edit the same way afterwards,
you would want to make a second view which uses the first as its source, and
the second/outer view would have a more restrictive 'where' clause that limits
to the rows being changed.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	schema - N.schema - PP - the schema that this view is in, if any
	application - N.application - PP - the app-space that this view is in, if any
	routine - N.routine - PP - parent routine of this one, if any
	p_view - N.view - PP - parent view of this one, if any; empty if this is the root view
	name - L.cstr - MA - the name this view is identified by, if any
	view_type - E.view_type - MA - what kind of view this is; eg: match, single, mult, compound, has-subq, recursive
	match_all_cols - L.bool - if true, this view matches every col (like '*'); if false, view_col has list
	compound_op - E.compound_operator - how to merge any child rowsets/views of this one together, if any
	distinct_rows - L.bool - (set quantifier) true, select|compound returns distinct rows; false, return all rows
	may_write - L.bool - true when we should at least try allowing updates through the view

	Note: setting distinct_rows to true results in "[SELECT|UNION|...] DISTINCT"; 
	a false or undefined value results in "[SELECT|UNION|...] ALL".

Local Attribute Dependencies List:

	view_type:
		match_all_cols - MATCH
		compound_op - COMPOUND - MA

Child Quantity List:

	view_hierarchy - 0 - 1

Distinct Child Groups List:

	ak_name:
		view_arg - name
		view_col - name
	ak_src_name:
		view_src - name
	ak_join:
		view_join - lhs_src,rhs_src
	ak_join_limit_one:
		view_join - rhs_src
	ak_expr_set_result_col:
		view_expr - set_result_col
	ak_expr_set_src_col:
		view_expr - set_src_col
	ak_expr_call_src_arg:
		view_expr - call_src_arg

Example List:

	|id|type    |ac|
	|--|--------|--|
	| 1|MULTIPLE|  | - user - joins the "user_auth" and "user_profile" tables
	| 2|MULTIPLE|  | - person_with_parents - joins the "person" table with itself twice
	| 3|SINGLE  |  | - user_theme - shows how many users use each theme pref value
	| 4|MATCH   | 1| - get_person - simply the "person" table
	| 5|MATCH   | 1| - get_user - simply the "user" view
	| 6|MATCH   | 1| - get_pwp - simply the "person_with_parents" view
	| 7|MATCH   | 1| - get_theme - simply the "user_theme" view

=head2 view_arg

When this view is a named sub-query, declared in the "with" clause of the main
query/view, then it can take arguments to define its caller context; each
"view_arg" Node you attach to a "view" Node names an argument.  This Node type
is not used for anything else; it is not like a routine arg that doubles for an
app host param.

The presence or absense of arguments in a view (assuming they are not
'constant') determines whether the view is correlated or uncorrelated when used
as a subquery (named or embedded) in another query.  Uncorrelated subqueries,
having no arguments, are simpler and can fire exactly once, fully prior to the
outer query; this kind can be implemented easily, or emulated simply with
temporary tables and multiple queries.  Correlated subqueries, having 1 or more
arguments, are more complicated and can fire multiple (or zero) times for each
execution of the outer query; it executes during the outer query (after it
starts and before it ends) because it uses one or more values generated by the
outer query (for example, it may fire once per each row either examined or
returned by the outer query); this kind is more complicated to implement or
emulate.  The term "correlated" is the standard term for this differentiation. 
The difference between correlated vs un- is analagous to a routine that takes
or does not take any arguments.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	view - N.view - PP - what named sub-query view this is an argument for
	name - L.cstr - MA - name of the argument
	domain - N.domain - MA - the user-customized data type for this argument

=head2 view_src

This type of Node describes a source table or view that is used by this view.
Specifically it applies only to the "from" clause in the generated SQL, where
applicable.  A table or view may be used for multiple sources, each of which
would be a unique alias for it.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	view - N.view - PP - unique identifier for view
	name - L.cstr - MA - unique "alias" identifier for source within view
	match_table - N.table - if set, the source is a table (and match_view must not be set)
	match_view - N.view - if set, the source is another view (and match_table must not be set)
	catalog_link - N.catalog_link - if match_* in another catalog, say via which catalog link
	may_write - L.bool - alternately to the same 'view' attribute, say here which exact sources we want to 'select for update'

Exclusive Attribute Groups List:

	match - match_table,match_view - MA

Distinct Child Groups List:

	ak_table_col:
		view_src_col - match_table_col
	ak_view_col:
		view_src_col - match_view_col

Example List:

	|id|vw|name        |mtb|mvw|
	|--|--|------------|---|---|
	| 1| 1|user_auth   |  1|   | - match "user_auth" table
	| 2| 1|user_profile|  2|   | - match "user_profile" table
	| 3| 2|self        |  4|   | - match "person" table
	| 4| 2|father      |  4|   | - match "person" table
	| 5| 2|mother      |  4|   | - match "person" table
	| 6| 3|user_pref   |  3|   | - match "user_pref" table
	| 7| 4|person      |  4|   | - match "person" table
	| 8| 5|m           |   |  1| - match "user" view
	| 9| 6|m           |   |  2| - match "person_with_parents" view
	|10| 7|m           |   |  3| - match "user_theme" view

=head2 view_src_arg

When a view_src matches a named subquery that has arguments, a view_src_arg
Node is used to correlate a subquery view_arg for the view that uses the
view_src.  This allows such named subqueries to be passed argument values when
used in a "from" clause.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	src - N.view_src - PP - which view source this column is associated with
	match_view_arg - N.view_arg - MA - which argument in the source view is represented

=head2 view_src_col

This type of Node describes a column in a source table or view that is used by
this view, as specified in the view_src table.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	src - N.view_src - PP - which view source this column is associated with
	match_table_col - N.table_col - which column from the source table is represented, if applicable
	match_view_col - N.view_col - which column from the source view is represented, if applicable

Exclusive Attribute Groups List:

	match_col - match_table_col,match_view_col - MA

Example List:

	|id|vs|mtc|mvc|
	|--|--|---|---|
	| 1| 1|  1|   | - "user_auth"."user_id"
	| 2| 1|  2|   | - "user_auth"."login_name"
	| 3| 1|  3|   | - "user_auth"."login_pass"
	| 4| 1|  4|   | - "user_auth"."private_name"
	| 5| 1|  5|   | - "user_auth"."private_email"
	| 6| 1|  6|   | - "user_auth"."may_login"
	| 7| 1|  7|   | - "user_auth"."max_sessions"
	| 8| 2|  8|   | - "user_profile"."user_id"
	| 9| 2|  9|   | - "user_profile"."public_name"
	|10| 2| 10|   | - "user_profile"."public_email"
	|11| 2| 11|   | - "user_profile"."web_url"
	|12| 2| 12|   | - "user_profile"."contact_net"
	|13| 2| 13|   | - "user_profile"."contact_phy"
	|14| 2| 14|   | - "user_profile"."bio"
	|15| 2| 15|   | - "user_profile"."plan"
	|16| 2| 16|   | - "user_profile"."comments"
	|17| 3| 20|   | - "self"."person_id"
	|18| 3| 22|   | - "self"."name"
	|19| 4| 20|   | - "father"."person_id"
	|20| 4| 22|   | - "father"."name"
	|21| 5| 20|   | - "mother"."person_id"
	|22| 5| 22|   | - "mother"."name"
	|23| 6| 18|   | - "user_pref"."pref_name"
	|24| 6| 19|   | - "user_pref"."pref_value"
	|25| 3| 24|   | - "self"."father_id"
	|26| 3| 25|   | - "self"."mother_id"
	|27| 9|   | 17| - "m"."self_name"
	|28| 9|   | 19| - "m"."father_name"
	|29| 9|   | 21| - "m"."mother_name"
	|30| 8|   |  1| - "m"."user_id"
	|31| 8|   |  2| - "m"."login_name"

=head2 view_col

This type of Node describes a single view column public interface, and has
details that are specific to that column; the view column implementation (where
the data comes from or goes to) is not described here.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	view - N.view - PP - what view this column is a result/interface for
	name - L.cstr - MA - unique identifier for column within view
	domain - N.domain - MA - the user-customized data type for this column
	set_routine_arg - N.routine_arg - the routine arg we are setting value of via select "into"
	set_routine_var - N.routine_var - the routine var we are setting value of via select "into"
	src_col - N.view_src_col - simply match this src col rather than defining with a view_expr

	is_writeable - L.bool - true when enough info is known to write changes to this column
	mandatory - L.bool - true when corresponding value must always be populated
	is_key - L.bool - true when this column is a part of unique id for source table or for view row

Exclusive Attribute Groups List:

	select_into - set_routine_arg,set_routine_var

Example List:

	|id|vw|col_name     |do|src|
	|--|--|-------------|--|---|
	| 1| 1|user_id      | 9|  1| - unique internal id for user, not changeable
	| 2| 1|login_name   |23|  2| - who user authenticates into app as
	| 3| 1|login_pass   |23|  3| - also used with authentication
	| 4| 1|private_name |24|  4| - real name that app service provider can know
	| 5| 1|private_email|24|  5| - email that service provider can contact user with
	| 6| 1|may_login    |19|  6| - true when user may use app at all
	| 7| 1|max_sessions | 7|  7| - max concurrent app logins user may have
	| 8| 1|public_name  |25|  9| - public name or pen name or public alias
	| 9| 1|public_email |25| 10| - email address the public may use for contact
	|10| 1|web_url      |25| 11| - personal/business website address of user
	|11| 1|contact_net  |25| 12| - info like ICQ number or other internet handles
	|12| 1|contact_phy  |25| 13| - physical address or city or telephone number
	|13| 1|bio          |25| 14| - brief description of the person
	|14| 1|plan         |25| 15| - what the person plans to do next
	|15| 1|comments     |25| 16| - other comments
	|16| 2|self_id      | 9| 17| - unique actual id for person, not changeable
	|17| 2|self_name    |24| 18| - actual name of the person they are called by
	|18| 2|father_id    | 9| 19| - person_id of this person's father, if known
	|19| 2|father_name  |24| 20| - actual name of the person's father
	|20| 2|mother_id    | 9| 21| - person_id of this person's mother, if known
	|21| 2|mother_name  |24| 22| - actual name of the person's mother
	|22| 3|theme_name   |27|   | - name of a user theme
	|23| 3|theme_count  | 9|   | - count of users that use this theme

=head2 view_join

This type of Node describes a join operation being done between two sources
(each a table or a view), both in the same view. There are usually
just two types of joins used, "equal" and "left".  Note that there can only be
one join between the same two sources.  Also the same source can never be on
the right side of more than one join (?).  A "right" join may be discouraged as
it would help prevent the same source from being outer joined to more than one
other source, which in many databases is illegal.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	view - N.view - PP - unique identifier for this view
	lhs_src - N.view_src - MA - which view source is on the left side of the join
	rhs_src - N.view_src - MA - which view source is on the right side of the join
	join_type - E.join_operator - MA - what kind of table/view join is being done

Child Quantity List:

	view_join_col - 1

Distinct Child Groups List:

	ak_lhs_col:
		view_join_col - lhs_src_col
	ak_rhs_col:
		view_join_col - rhs_src_col

Example List:

	|id|vw|lhs|rhs|type|
	|--|--|---|---|----|
	| 1| 1|  1|  2|LEFT| - "user_auth" left join "user_profile"
	| 2| 2|  3|  4|LEFT| - "self" left join "father"
	| 3| 2|  3|  5|LEFT| - "self" left join "mother"

=head2 view_join_col

This type of Node describes a This is an intersection table between view_join
and either table_col or view_col; it says which table or view columns are
involved in each view join.  Each Node of this Node Type uniquely corresponds
to part of a join operation being done between two sources (each a table or a
view), both in the same view.  There is one Node for each pair
of source columns (one from each source) that are being matched.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	join - N.view_join - PP - which view join this column is associated with
	lhs_src_col - N.view_src_col - MA - which column from the left source is being matched on
	rhs_src_col - N.view_src_col - MA - which column from the right source is being matched on

Example List:

	|id|vj|lhc|rhc|
	|--|--|---|---|
	| 1| 1|  1|  8| - on "user_profile"."user_id" = "user_auth"."user_id"
	| 2| 2| 25| 19| - on "father"."person_id" = "self"."father_id"
	| 3| 3| 26| 21| - on "mother"."person_id" = "self"."mother_id"

=head2 view_hierarchy

This type of Node describes an n-level hierarchical join to be part of a view
compound definition (similar to Oracle's start-with-connect-by feature).  Only
one is allowed per view.

Note: While SQL::Routine supports the SQL:2003/1999 "with" syntax, that
among its other powers can do powerful hierarchical queries, I have provided
"view_hierarchy" as a way of invoking simpler Oracle-style "start-with
connect-by" tersely.

I<Note: view_hierarchy should be considered a deprecated feature.>

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	view - N.view - PP - what view this has a part in defining
	start_src_col - N.view_src_col - MA - which source column is checked against to determine the root of the hierarchy
	start_literal - L.misc - if start_src_col is being compared to a literal, then store the literal value here
	start_view_arg - N.view_arg - when view is a "with" sub-query, use value of an argument to the view
	start_routine_arg - N.routine_arg - use value of an arg to the current routine
	start_routine_var - N.routine_var - use value of a variable declared in the current routine
	conn_src_col - N.view_src_col - MA - which source column contains a record's own identifier against which children match
	p_conn_src_col - N.view_src_col - MA - which source column contains the value of a parent identifier

Exclusive Attribute Groups List:

	start_val - start_literal,start_view_arg,start_routine_arg,start_routine_var - MA

=head2 view_expr

This type of Node is intended to describe most of the parts of a SQL "select"
which is the basis for a view definition.  The parts described here
correspond to these SQL terms: "result list", "where", "group by", "having",
"order by". All of these parts are optional, and often mutually exclusive. 
However, "having" can only be used with "group by".

The main parts that are not described here are the joined table definitions,
most related parts of the "from" clause (except for invoked 'with' subquery
arguments), compound operations (such as "union"), and any hierarchical
operations.  See the other view_* tables for those.

The "order by" described by this table is applied prior to any compound view
merge operations; since those operations tend to change the order of rows, it
would only make sense to use this when your view only has one source
is not a compound view.  If this is a compound view, or you only want to sort by
output columns, then use the sort_priority field in view_col to sort instead,
which has much simpler syntax, and is evaluated after all compound view merging
is done.

This type of Node describes a sub-expression that is part of one of several
optional main/root expressions in a view definition. All of these
sub-expressions form a hierarchy where children are "arguments" to their parent
expressions.  There can only be one root expression for a "where" and a
"having" part, and that is expected to return a boolean value.  The "group by"
and "order by" parts can each have multiple root expressions, each of which is
part of an ordered list of "columns" arranged in the priority that they are
applied.  The "start with" and "connect by" can only have one root expression
each.

This type of Node also describes details that would only be used in Inserts or 
Updates, where applicable; this allows you to set values based on expressions 
or function calls, and not just literal values.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	p_expr - N.view_expr - PP - parent expression of this one, if any; empty if this is the root expression
	view - N.view - PP - what view this expression has a part in defining
	view_part - E.view_part - what "part" of a view definition this is defining
	set_result_col - N.view_col - the view interface/result column we are defining the value of
	set_src_col - N.view_src_col - this is the column we are setting the value of in insert or update op
	call_src_arg - N.view_src_arg - arg of named subquery used in "from" we are passing value to
	call_view_arg - N.view_arg - if parent expr set valf_call_view, name view arg that curr expr passes value to
	call_sroutine_cxt - E.standard_routine_context - if parent expr set valf_call_sroutine, this cxt curr expr passes val to
	call_sroutine_arg - E.standard_routine_arg - if parent expr set valf_call_sroutine, this arg curr expr passes val to
	call_uroutine_cxt - N.routine_context - if parent expr set valf_call_uroutine, name routine cxt that curr expr passes value to
	call_uroutine_arg - N.routine_arg - if parent expr set valf_call_uroutine, name routine arg that curr expr passes value to
	cont_type - E.container_type - MA - what basic container type the expression value is
	valf_literal - L.misc - use a literal value, such as number or string
	domain - N.domain - cast or declare curr literal expr into this data type / domain
	valf_src_col - N.view_src_col - use the value of a local view source column
	valf_result_col - N.view_col - match a result column; used mainly with MATCH view, or in 'having','order' sql elsewhere
	valf_p_view_arg - N.view_arg - when view is a "with" sub-query, use value of an argument to the view
	valf_p_routine_cxt - N.routine_context - use value of a context arg to the current routine
	valf_p_routine_arg - N.routine_arg - use value of an arg to the current routine
	valf_p_routine_var - N.routine_var - use value of a variable declared in the current routine
	valf_seq_next - N.sequence - use "next" value from a named user defined sequence generator (schema object)
	valf_call_view - N.view - use result of a call to a view, such as a subquery or a cursor
	valf_call_sroutine - E.standard_routine - use result of a call to a standard built-in function (or directive); one of standard_routine
	valf_call_uroutine - N.routine - use result of a call to a user-defined stored function (routine)
	catalog_link - N.catalog_link - if uroutine in another catalog, say via which catalog link

Exclusive Attribute Groups List:

	expr_root_view_part - p_expr,view_part - MA

Local Attribute Dependencies List:

	view_part:
		set_result_col - RESULT - MA
		set_src_col - SET - MA
		call_src_arg - FROM - MA
	valf_literal:
		domain - MA
	valf_call_uroutine:
		catalog_link

Distinct Child Groups List:

	ak_view_arg:
		view_expr - call_view_arg
	ak_sroutine_arg:
		view_expr - call_sroutine_cxt
		view_expr - call_sroutine_arg
	ak_uroutine_arg:
		view_expr - call_uroutine_cxt
		view_expr - call_uroutine_arg

Example List:

	|id|cl|vw|part  |pe|lit  |blv|rta     |src|mtc|sf   |uf|
	|--|--|--|------|--|-----|---|--------|---|---|-----|--|
	| 1|  | 5|WHERE |  |     |   |        |   |   |EQ   |  | - standard function of "eq(a,b)"
	| 2|  |  |      | 1|     |   |        | 30|   |     |  | - match column "user_auth"."user_id"
	| 3|  |  |      | 1|     |   |curr_uid|   |   |     |  | - value of host param "curr_uid"
	| 4|  | 6|WHERE |  |     |   |        |   |   |AND  |  | - standard function of "and(a,b)"
	| 5|  |  |      | 4|     |   |        |   |   |LIKE |  | - standard function of "like(a,b)"
	| 6|  |  |      | 5|     |   |        | 28|   |     |  | - match column "m"."father_name"
	| 7|  |  |      | 5|     |   |srchw_fa|   |   |     |  | - value of host param "srchw_fa"
	| 8|  |  |      | 4|     |   |        |   |   |LIKE |  | - standard function of "like(a,b)"
	| 9|  |  |      | 8|     |   |        | 29|   |     |  | - match column "m"."mother_name"
	|10|  |  |      | 8|     |   |srchw_mo|   |   |     |  | - value of host param "srchw_mo"
	|11|  | 3|WHERE |  |     |   |        |   |   |EQ   |  | - standard function of "eq(a,b)"
	|12|  |  |      |11|     |   |        | 23|   |     |  | - match column "user_pref"."pref_name"
	|13|  |  |      |11|theme|   |        |   |   |     |  | - match literal value of "theme"
	|14|  | 3|GROUP |  |     |   |        | 24|   |     |  | - group by "user_pref"."pref_value"
	|15|  | 3|HAVING|  |     |   |        |   |   |GT   |  | - standard function of "gt(a,b)"
	|16|  |  |      |15|     |   |        |   |   |COUNT|  | - standard function of "count(col)"
	|17|  |  |      |15|    1|   |        |   |   |     |  | - match literal value of "theme"
	|42|22| 3|RESULT|  |     |   |        | 24|   |     |  |
	|43|23| 3|RESULT|  |     |   |        |   |   |COUNT|  |
	|44|  |  |      |43|     |   |        | 24|   |     |  |
	|51|  | 5|ORDER |  |     |   |        | 31|   |     |  |
	|52|  | 6|ORDER |  |     |   |        | 27|   |     |  |
	|53|  | 6|ORDER |  |     |   |        | 28|   |     |  |
	|54|  | 6|ORDER |  |     |   |        | 29|   |     |  |
	|55|  | 3|ORDER |  |     |   |        |   | 23|     |  |
	|56|  | 3|ORDER |  |     |   |        |   | 22|     |  |

	Notes: In Oracle notation: the first view says match where
	"user_auth.user_id = :curr_uid", the second says match where "father.name
	like '%'||:srchw_fa||'%' and mother.name like '%'||:srchw_mo||'%'", the
	third says match where "user_pref.pref_name = 'theme'".

	Notes: In Oracle notation: the third view says match having "count(*) > 1" ("count" has no args).

	Notes: The example 'routine_var' values are actually incorrect and will be changed to id numbers.

Had there been separate Node types for the above based on view part, here are their descriptions:

view_col_def: This type of Node describes a sub-expression that is part of an
interface/output column definition in a view; this is an intersection table
between view_col and each compound view member; there needs to be one full expression for
every view_col/view-compound-member combination in a view.  These expressions
are used in the first part of the SQL "where" clause, before "from"; these are
not intended to affect how many columns or rows the view returns, but only what
the exact content of each column is.  All of these sub-expressions form a
hierarchy where children are "arguments" to their parent expressions; the root
expression is supposed to return the same type of value as the domain specified
in the view_col record.

view_src_filter: Each Node of this type uniquely corresponds to a
sub-expression that is part of a filter definition in a view.  This
filter definition is run against the rows in the view sources just after or
while they are being joined, and it is supposed to eliminate most or all of the
source rows that we don't want to keep.  In other words, the whole expression
becomes the "where" clause in the generated SQL, where applicable (it runs
prior to the SQL "group by").  All of these sub-expressions form a hierarchy
where children are "arguments" to their parent expressions; the root expression
is supposed to return a boolean value.

view_grp: When any Nodes of this type exist for a particular view,
each one matches a source column, and the rows returned by the view
will be grouped (self-merged) so that each row has a unique permutation of
values in the columns being grouped on.  Also, when any view_grp records are
used, that view may only use the columns being grouped on in its
output column definition.  Certain standard functions can only be used when
grouping.

view_grp_filter: This type of Node describes a sub-expression that is part of a
filter definition in a view.  This filter definition is run against
the rows after they have been grouped; it is supposed to do additional
filtering that could only be done after grouping, such as when the
sub-expression uses standard functions that only work in a grouping SQL select.
This whole expression becomes the "having" clause in the generated SQL, where
applicable.  All of these sub-expressions form a hierarchy where children are
"arguments" to their parent expressions; the root expression is supposed to
return a boolean value.

view_order: This type of Node says what order to return the rows for a view
compound or entire view in; there is one record for each solumn that is being
sorted by. They correspond to the SQL "order by".  Also, when any view_grp
records are used, that view may only use the columns being grouped on
in its output column definition.  Certain standard functions can only be used
when grouping.

=head2 routine

This type of Node describes the core (single cardinality) description of a
database routine, such as a user defined function, stored procedure, trigger,
or un-named block; SQL::Routine uses the same set of Node Types to describe
them as they are almost identical in structure.  Un-named blocks normally just
appear in application-space; the others normally appear in database schemas or
as sub-routines inside other routines.  

For the present we are also representing Oracle's "package" as a routine, though 
that may change soon.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	schema - N.schema - PP - the schema that this routine is in, if any
	application - N.application - PP - the app-space that this routine is in, if any
	p_routine - N.routine - PP - parent routine of this one, if any; empty if this is the root routine
	name - L.cstr - MA - name routine ident by in a [schema, p_routine, app], or name of trigger
	routine_type - E.routine_type - MA - what kind of routine this is
	return_cont_type - E.container_type - container type of function's return value
	return_domain - N.domain - domain of a function's scalar return value
	trigger_on_table - N.table - the table that the trigger watches
	trigger_on_view - N.view - the view that the trigger watches
	trigger_event - E.basic_trigger_event - when a trigger executes
	trigger_per_stmt - L.bool - true, exec each stmt, false, each row

Local Attribute Dependencies List:

	routine_type:
		return_cont_type - FUNCTION - MA
		trigger_on_table,trigger_on_view - TRIGGER - MA
		trigger_event - TRIGGER - MA
		trigger_per_stmt - TRIGGER - MA
	return_cont_type:
		return_domain - SCALAR - MA

Child Quantity List:

	routine_context - 0 - 1
	routine_stmt - 1

Distinct Child Groups List:

	ak_name:
		routine_context - name
		routine_arg - name
		routine_var - name

=head2 routine_context

This type of Node describes a special context argument variable to a routine.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	routine - N.routine - PP - what routine this context argument is for
	name - L.cstr - MA - unique identifier for variable within view
	cont_type - E.container_type - MA - what basic container type the context is
	conn_link - N.catalog_link - for CONN context type, ref to cat link def the conn handle
	curs_view - N.view - for CURSOR context type, ref to view def the cursor

Exclusive Attribute Groups List:

	context - conn_link,curs_view - MA

	Notes: This helps force cont_type to be one of [CONN, CURSOR].

Local Attribute Dependencies List:

	cont_type:
		conn_link - CONN - MA
		curs_view - CURSOR - MA

=head2 routine_arg

This type of Node describes an input and/or output argument variable to a routine.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	routine - N.routine - PP - what routine this argument is for
	name - L.cstr - MA - unique identifier for variable within view
	cont_type - E.container_type - MA - what basic container type the argument is
	domain - N.domain - user customized data type of scalar arg
	conn_link - N.catalog_link - put ref to catalog_link defining this db conn handle here
	curs_view - N.view - put reference to the view defining this cursor here

Local Attribute Dependencies List:

	cont_type:
		domain - SCALAR - MA
		conn_link - CONN - MA
		curs_view - CURSOR - MA

=head2 routine_var

This type of Node describes a variable within the scope of a routine; it can be
used by that routine and by any child routines, where applicable. If the
current routine is a package, these are package-level variables.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	routine - N.routine - PP - what routine this variable is in
	name - L.cstr - MA - unique identifier for variable within view
	cont_type - E.container_type - MA - what basic container type the variable is
	domain - N.domain - user customized data type of scalar variable
	init_lit_val - L.misc - an initial value for a SCALAR var can go here
	is_constant - L.bool - this says a SCALAR value may not be changed
	conn_link - N.catalog_link - put the catalog_link defining db conn handle here
	curs_view - N.view - put the view defining cursor here
	curs_for_update - L.bool - true if CURSOR is select for update, false (def) if r/o

Local Attribute Dependencies List:

	cont_type:
		domain - SCALAR - MA
		init_lit_val - SCALAR
		is_constant - SCALAR
		conn_link - CONN - MA
		curs_view - CURSOR - MA
		curs_for_update - CURSOR

=head2 routine_stmt

This type of Node describes a statement or logic control or line within a
routine, which includes such operations as variable assignment or reading a
cursor or executing a DML operation.  Often, most details for a statement are
in child expression Nodes.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	routine - N.routine - PP - what routine this statement is in
	block_routine - N.routine - this child routine defs contents of BEGIN ... END
	assign_dest_cxt - N.routine_context - this context arg may be where the expression result goes
	assign_dest_arg - N.routine_arg - this 'out' arg may be where the expression result goes
	assign_dest_var - N.routine_var - this var may be where the expression result goes
	call_sroutine - E.standard_routine - this is the standard built-in procedure to call
	call_uroutine - N.routine - this is the user-defined stored procedure (routine) to call
	catalog_link - N.catalog_link - if uroutine in another catalog, say via which catalog link

	If 'block_routine' is set, the routine statement declares a compound
	statement that can contain other statements; eg BEGIN ... END.  If either
	of 'assign_dest_[arg|var]' is set, the action is an assignment of an
	expression value to a variable (SQL:2003 calls it 'SET').  If either of
	'call_[s|u]routine' is set, the action is to call that built-in or routine.

	TODO: Relevant structures to specify certain exceptions to catch or throw. 
	Meanwhile, all exceptions are thrown out to the application that is using SRT.

Exclusive Attribute Groups List:

	stmt_type - block_routine,assign_dest_cxt,assign_dest_arg,assign_dest_var,
		call_sroutine,call_uroutine - MA

Local Attribute Dependencies List:

	call_uroutine:
		catalog_link

Distinct Child Groups List:

	ak_sroutine_arg:
		routine_expr - call_sroutine_cxt
		routine_expr - call_sroutine_arg
	ak_uroutine_arg:
		routine_expr - call_uroutine_cxt
		routine_expr - call_uroutine_arg

=head2 routine_expr

This type of Node describes a sub-expression that is part of a main/root
expression which is the right hand side of a variable assignment statement in a
routine.  All of these sub-expressions form a hierarchy where children are
"arguments" to their parent expressions.  The root expression is expected to
return a value that can be stored in the routine variable on the left side of
the statement.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	p_expr - N.routine_expr - PP - parent expression of this one, if any; empty if this is the root expression
	p_stmt - N.routine_stmt - PP - unique identifier for routine routine_stmt this expression is part of
	call_sroutine_cxt - E.standard_routine_context - if parent expr set valf_call_sroutine, this cxt curr expr passes val to
	call_sroutine_arg - E.standard_routine_arg - if parent expr set valf_call_sroutine, this arg curr expr passes val to
	call_uroutine_cxt - N.routine_context - if parent expr set valf_call_uroutine, name routine cxt that curr expr passes value to
	call_uroutine_arg - N.routine_arg - if parent expr set valf_call_uroutine, name routine arg that curr expr passes value to
	cont_type - E.container_type - MA - what basic container type the expression value is
	valf_literal - L.misc - use a literal value, such as number or string
	domain - N.domain - cast or declare curr literal expr into this data type / domain
	valf_p_routine_cxt - N.routine_context - use value of a context arg to the current routine
	valf_p_routine_arg - N.routine_arg - use value of an arg to the current routine
	valf_p_routine_var - N.routine_var - use value of a variable declared in the current routine
	valf_seq_next - N.sequence - use "next" value from a named user defined sequence generator (schema object)
	valf_call_sroutine - E.standard_routine - use result of a call to a standard built-in function (or directive); one of standard_routine
	valf_call_uroutine - N.routine - use result of a call to a user-defined stored function (routine)
	catalog_link - N.catalog_link - if uroutine in another catalog, say via which catalog link
	actn_catalog_link - N.catalog_link - if act-on sroutine arg should be a catalog_link Node, this is it
	actn_schema - N.schema - if act-on sroutine arg should be a schema Node, this is it
	actn_domain - N.domain - if act-on sroutine arg should be a domain Node, this is it
	actn_sequence - N.sequence - if act-on sroutine arg should be a sequence Node, this is it
	actn_table - N.table - if act-on sroutine arg should be a table Node, this is it
	actn_view - N.view - if act-on sroutine arg should be a view Node, this is it
	actn_routine - N.routine - if act-on sroutine arg should be a routine Node, this is it
	actn_user - N.user - if act-on sroutine arg should be a user Node, this is it

Local Attribute Dependencies List:

	cont_type:
		actn_catalog_link,actn_schema,actn_domain,actn_sequence,actn_table,
			actn_view,actn_routine,actn_user - SRT_NODE - MA
	valf_literal:
		domain - MA
	valf_call_uroutine:
		catalog_link

Distinct Child Groups List:

	ak_sroutine_arg:
		routine_expr - call_sroutine_cxt
		routine_expr - call_sroutine_arg
	ak_uroutine_arg:
		routine_expr - call_uroutine_cxt
		routine_expr - call_uroutine_arg

=head2 tools

This pseudo-Node has two child Node-types: data_storage_product,
data_link_product.

Distinct Child Groups List:

	ak_name:
		data_storage_product - name
		data_link_product - name

=head2 data_storage_product

This type of Node describes a distinct data storage product (database) that
someone can use to implement a database in, such as Oracle 9i or PostgreSQL 7.4
or SQLite 2.8.12.  Details of how you connect to said product are generally not
considered here as, for example, the SQL you generate usually doesn't depend on
the connection method, but just the SQL processor at the end of the line.

The attributes in this Node mainly just have meaning to external code that
mediates between a SQL::Routine and the native drivers for database
products; typically they are used to map a specific native driver to use,
and/or a specific SQL generator to use for the mediation.  If you are using
multiple versions of the same database product line for different database
instances, you should have a separate one of these Nodes for each, as the
different versions may not support the same features or interface.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	name - L.cstr - MA - lets you label the product in the model if you want
	product_code - L.cstr - MA - a string recognized by the mediation layer as what product we have
	is_memory_based - L.bool - if true, db data is held entirely in RAM memory of our own process
	is_file_based - L.bool - if true, db data held in named file(s) that we ref to open in our own process
	is_local_proc - L.bool - if true, database is a local service we access via IPC or something
	is_network_svc - L.bool - if true, database is on a network server, access by network protocol

Exclusive Attribute Groups List:

	type - is_memory_based,is_file_based,is_local_proc,is_network_svc - MA

=head2 data_link_product

This type of Node describes a distinct data link product that someone can use
to connect to a data storage product, such as ODBC 2 or OCI8 or a proxy.  Your
choice here doesn't necessarily reflect on what data storage product you are
using as the link product may abstract its details away.  That said, while a
catalog blueprint typically just needs to know its storage product, an
application linking to one should know a link product and possibly a storage.

The attributes in this Node mainly just have meaning to external code that
mediates between a SQL::Routine and the native drivers for database
products; typically they are used to map a specific native driver to use,
and/or a specific SQL generator to use for the mediation.  If you are using
multiple versions of the same database product line for different database
instances, you should have a separate one of these Nodes for each, as the
different versions may not support the same features or interface.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	name - L.cstr - MA - lets you label the product in the model if you want
	product_code - L.cstr - MA - a string recognized by the mediation layer as what product we have
	is_proxy - L.bool - if true, link product is a transparent proxy which calls another link prod (we may spec)

=head2 sites

This pseudo-Node has two child Node-types: catalog_instance,
application_instance.

Distinct Child Groups List:

	ak_name:
		catalog_instance - name
		application_instance - name

=head2 catalog_instance

This type of Node describes a distinct "database instance" or "server" or
"host" which is described by an "catalog".  This is what an
application "connects to" when it will use a database.  What often happens in
real life is that you make a database/catalog design and then instantiate
multiple copies; for example, one may contain data for testers of your
application, while another has clean data for marketers to show off, while
various others are installed at customer sites.  Since there can be in real
life multiple copies of a database design within communications range of each
other, such that a client can 'pick one', or when you want to clone data
between them, SQL::Routine lets you model this by having separate
"catalog" and "catalog_instance" Nodes.  The 'instance' Node stores
the instance specific details like server IP address or domain name.  Most of
your "user" Nodes should be children of this, since they are usually different
between installations; only those that own a shared schema can't be, but normal
users shouldn't log in as those.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	name - L.cstr - MA - lets you label the instance if you want; this isn't used when making SQL
	product - N.data_storage_product - MA - what product implements this; determines SQL dialect to use
	blueprint - N.catalog - MA - what catalog blueprint describes this instance
	file_path - L.cstr - Path on a file system for a file-based database, if applicable
	server_ip - L.cstr - Internet IP address of the database server, if applicable
	server_domain - L.cstr - Internet domain name of the database server, if applicable
	server_port - L.uint - TCP/IP port the database listens to, if applicable
	local_dsn - L.cstr - locally known driver-generic name for the catalog link (to cat or ch prox)
	login_name - L.cstr - if we want to spec a username to always connect with, put here; else get it at runtime
	login_pass - L.cstr - if we always use same password, put it here; else get it at runtime

Distinct Child Groups List:

	ak_option:
		catalog_instance_opt - key
	ak_cat_link_inst:
		catalog_link_instance - unrealized
	ak_user_name:
		user - name

Example List:

	|id|bp|name|
	|--|--|----|
	| 1| 1|    | - a default database/catalog, usually just used if it is the only database
	| 2| 2|site| - a multi-schema genealogy database/catalog that you manage
	| 3| 2|dist| - a similar database/catalog that someone else manages

=head2 catalog_instance_opt

The attributes in catalog_instance_opt Nodes mainly just have meaning to
external code that is associated with the storage product you are using to
implement this current catalog_instance.  (Each one is like an associative
array element, having a distinct key name and a value.)  These Nodes are
intended for use in such situations where information in the model can be lost
or be made more ambiguous when it is realized by an implementing product.

For example, an opt Node could say what to do with a storage product that
doesn't support multiple schemas in the same catalog; eg: does it implement
using a separate catalog for each schema (where catalog names have a common
prefix), or does it combine the multiple schemas into a single schema where
each schema object has a common name prefix.  Such information is said to be
lost because, for example, if one were to scan an existing such database,
second case, to build a new model, all it could do is create a single schema
containing all of the longer-name objects, unless it was explicitly told
through external data like these Nodes to treat the first parts of each
implemented object name as a schema name and hence put multiple schemas in the
model.  Or in the first case, whether multiple catalogs should get combined.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	catalog - N.catalog_instance - PP - the catalog_instance that this option customizes
	key - L.cstr - MA - this is the option key that the the external code looks for
	value - L.misc - MA - this is the associated option value

=head2 application_instance

This type of Node describes a distinct instance of an "application".  
Mainly it just resolves the application's potential catalog links to actual ones; 
it says which specific database instances we talk to, while the blueprint only 
knows about the blueprint for said instances.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	name - L.cstr - MA - lets you label the instance if you want
	blueprint - N.application - MA - what application blueprint describes this instance

Distinct Child Groups List:

	ak_cat_link_inst:
		catalog_link_instance - unrealized

=head2 catalog_link_instance

This type of Node describes a distinct instance of an 'catalog_link'.
This mainly holds client install specific details, like what catalog instance
to talk to, what its local DSN is, such as would be registered with ODBC or in
tsnames.ora, or would be a filename, or stuff like that.  Also connect string
details perhaps, such as username and password, lest they be run-time arguments
instead.  I<Some of these attributes will probably be removed shortly, with 
catalog_link_instance_opt Nodes storing their details instead.>

Note: There can only be a single catalog_link_instance per distinct
catalog_link + [catalog|application]_instance, so it is safe for the
CATALOG_*() built-in standard functions to use catalog_link as arguments or
return values; a program can always determine what catalog_link_instance
actually gets used given the 1:1 relationship.

In situations where proxys are involved, and the proxy is transparent such that
the proxy lets a client tell it what it is to be a proxy for at runtime, you
would normally have an extra catalog_link_instance Node in the client space to
specify details of that for each proxy added; eg: no proxies means one link,
one proxy means two.  In SQL::Routine, if one catalog_link_instance Node is
the child of another, then the parent is what the application invokes to talk
to the proxy, and the child says what to tell the proxy to connect to.  On the
other hand, if a proxy is opaque such as for example an application can't
control what it is a proxy for at runtime, then only one catalog_link_instance
Node gets used, which points to the address of the proxy.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	p_link - N.catalog_link_instance - PP - parent link of this one (that which calls this), if any
	catalog - N.catalog_instance - PP - the schema in this instance may use the actual catalog link
	application - N.application_instance - PP - the routines in this app inst may use the actual catalog link
	product - N.data_link_product - MA - what product implements this; determines driver to use
	unrealized - N.catalog_link - the unrealized catalog link that we are 'implementing'
	target - N.catalog_instance - this is what the link connects to
	local_dsn - L.cstr - locally known driver-specific name for the catalog link (to cat or ch prox)
	login_name - L.cstr - if we want to spec a username to always connect with, put here; else get it at runtime
	login_pass - L.cstr - if we always use same password, put it here; else get it at runtime

Exclusive Attribute Groups List:

	link_root_unrealized - p_link,unrealized - MA
	link_root_target - p_link,target - MA

Child Quantity List:

	catalog_link_instance - 0 - 1

Distinct Child Groups List:

	ak_option:
		catalog_link_instance_opt - key

=head2 catalog_link_instance_opt

The attributes in catalog_link_instance_opt Nodes mainly just have meaning to
external code that is associated with the link product you are using to
implement this current catalog_link_instance.  (Each one is like an associative
array element, having a distinct key name and a value.)  These Nodes are
intended for use in customizing how the link product is used for this link;
examples of this include a DSN to use, or whether user/pass are provided in the
model or at runtime host parameters.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	link - N.catalog_link_instance - PP - the catalog_link_instance that this option customizes
	key - L.cstr - MA - this is the option key that the the external code looks for
	value - L.misc - MA - this is the associated option value

=head2 user

This type of Node describes a "user" who would connect to and/or has privileges
in a database/catalog.  Most database products support multiple users per
catalog, though some only support one.  Each database schema may/must be owned
by exactly one user (according to the SQL:1999 spec) but it may be used by
several.  With some products like Oracle, a "user" and a "schema" are one and
the same entity (the schema may not have any objects, though); however,
SQL::Routine is designed such that they are separate, and one user may own
multiple schemas.

Most database products have a granular security system where each user must be
explicitly granted the rights to do certain kinds of tasks there, such as read
data or write data or edit a schema or even connect to the database.  In
SQL::Routine, you create "role" Nodes and assign them privileges (roles are
named groups of privileges); you then allocate roles to the users that may have
the privileges they group.

Note that, in the best interests of security, it is recommended that the
database user which your application connects as for normal use should not be
the same as one that owns any schemas; if your application creates its own
schema, then it should have an additional database user for that purpose.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	catalog - N.catalog_instance - PP - the catalog_instance that this user is in
	name - L.cstr - the name this user is identified by, and what he authenticates himself with
	user_type - E.user_type - MA - what type of user this is; eg: schema owner vs data editor
	match_owner - N.owner - the catalog that this user is in
	password - L.cstr - the password this user provides when authenticating themself
	default_schema - N.schema - this user's default schema; unqualified object references look here

Local Attribute Dependencies List:

	user_type:
		name - ROOT,SCHEMA_OWNER,DATA_EDITOR - MA
		match_owner - SCHEMA_OWNER - MA
		password - ROOT,SCHEMA_OWNER,DATA_EDITOR - MA

	Note: In other words to the above, all user types *except* ANONYMOUS have a user name and password.

Distinct Child Groups List:

	ak_role:
		user_role - role

Example List:

	|id|ci|ow|name    |pass  |sc|
	|--|--|--|--------|------|--|
	| 1| 1| 1|        |      | 1| - a default and/or 'public' user, or for db without 'users'
	| 2| 2| 2|ronsealy|K34dsD| 2| - Ron Sealy, owns all schemas in instance 2
	| 3| 2|  |joesmith|fdsKJ4| 3| - Joe Smith is a normal user in instance 2
	| 4| 3| 2|florence|0sfs8G| 2| - Florence, owns all schemas in instance 3
	| 5| 3|  |thainuff|9340sd| 3| - Thainuff is a normal user in instance 3

=head2 user_role

Each Node of this type indicates that a specific user has been granted a
specific role, and the privileges that come with it.

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	user - N.user - PP - the user that a role is granted to
	role - N.role - MA - the role that is being granted

=head2 circumventions

This pseudo-Node has one child Node-type: sql_fragment.

=head2 sql_fragment

This type of Node holds literal SQL fragments that you can inject into SQL that
is generated from SQL::Routine Nodes.  I<Details may be changed later.>

Attribute List:

	id - NODE_ID - unique identifier for each Node within this Node Type
	product - N.data_storage_product - if set, only use with this product; if not, use with all prods
	att_node_type - L.cstr - the Node Type of the normal Node we attach this SQL fragment to
	att_node_id - L.uint - the Node Id of the normal Node we attach this SQL fragment to
	is_inside - L.bool - the fragment goes "inside" the SQL generated from attached-to Node
	is_before - L.bool - the fragment goes "before" the SQL
	is_after - L.bool - the fragment goes "after" the SQL
	fragment - L.cstr - this is the actual SQL string fragment to be injected

Exclusive Attribute Groups List:

	is_where - is_inside,is_before,is_after

=head1 OLDER DOCUMENTATION

These paragraphs were more or less the original documentation for high-level
SQL::Routine concepts, back when each concept was planned to be a separate
class of its own.  They were originally published in Framework.pod since the
first release of the Rosetta distribution (2003-01-05), and up until 2004-02-04
inclusive. They are here in Language.pod as of 2004-02-12.  Some details you
see here shouldn't be considered accurate.

B<SQL::Routine::Command> - This Model class describes an action that needs
to be done against a database; the action may include several steps, and all of
them must be done when executing the Command.  A Command object has one
mandatory string property named 'type' (eg: 'database_open', 'table_create',
'data_insert'), which sets the context for all of its other properties, which
are in a hash property named 'args'.  Elements of 'args' often include other
Model class objects like 'Table' or 'DataType'.  Like all Model objects, this
is static and context-independant; it is intended to be serialized and passed
to code like DBI->prepare().   While host params are often used with them (such
as values to insert or update, or record matching conditions), it is always up
to the calling code to resolve the host params such as with a user prompt (as
SQL*Plus does), and pass those to code like DBI->execute().  I<See also
Rosetta::Command.>

B<SQL::Routine::DataType> - This Model class describes a simple data type,
which serves as metadata for a single atomic or scalar unit of data, or a
column whose members are all of the same data type, such as in a regular
database table or in row sets read from or to be written to one.  This class
would be used both when manipulating database schema and when manipulating
database data.

B<SQL::Routine::Table> - This Model class describes a single database
table, and would be used for such things as managing schema for the table (eg:
create, alter, destroy), and describing the table's "public interface" so other
functionality like views or various DML operations know how to use the table.
In its simplest sense, a Table object consists of a table name, a list of table
columns, a list of keys, a list of constraints, and a few other implementation
details.  This class does not describe anything that is changed by DML
activity, such as a count of stored records, or the current values of sequence
generators attached to columns.  This class would be used both when
manipulating database schema and when manipulating database data.  This class
can generate SQL::Routine::Command objects having types of: 'table_verify',
'table_create', 'table_alter', 'table_destroy'.

B<SQL::Routine::View> - This Model class describes a single database view,
which conceptually looks like a table, but it is used differently.  Tables and
views are similar in that they both represent or store a matrix of data, which
has uniquely identifiable columns, and rows which can be uniquely identifiable
but may not be.  With the way that Rosetta implements views, you can do all of
the same DML operations with them that you can do with tables: select, insert,
update, delete rows; that said, the process for doing any of those with views
is more complicated than with tables, but this complexity is usually internal
to Rosetta so you shouldn't have to code any differently between them.  Tables
and views are different in that tables actually store data in themselves, while
views don't.  A view is actually a custom abstracted interface to one or more
database tables which are related to each other in a specific way; when you
issue DML against a view, you are actually fetching from or modifying the data
stored in one (simplest case) or more tables.  This class can generate
SQL::Routine::Command objects having types of: 'data_select', 'data_insert',
'data_update', 'data_delete', 'data_lock', 'data_unlock', 'view_verify',
'view_create', 'view_alter', 'view_destroy'.

=head1 SEE ALSO

SQL::Routine and the various other modules mentioned in its SEE ALSO.

=cut
